Northern Regional Health Authority v. Horrocks
Collection
Supreme Court Judgments
Date
2021-10-22
Neutral citation
2021 SCC 42
Report
[2021] 3 SCR 107
Case number
37878
Judges
Wagner, Richard; Abella, Rosalie Silberman; Karakatsanis, Andromache; Côté, Suzanne; Brown, Russell; Rowe, Malcolm; Kasirer, Nicholas
On appeal from
Manitoba
Notes
Case in Brief SCC Case Information
Decision Content
SUPREME COURT OF CANADA
Citation: Northern Regional Health Authority v. Horrocks, 2021 SCC 42, [2021] 3 S.C.R. 107
Appeal Heard: April 15, 2021 Judgment Rendered: October 22, 2021 Docket: 37878
Between: Northern Regional Health Authority Appellant
and
Linda Horrocks and Manitoba Human Rights Commission Respondents
- and -
Attorney General of British Columbia, Don Valley Community Legal Services, Canadian Association of Counsel to Employers, Canadian Human Rights Commission, British Columbia Council of Administrative Tribunals and Empowerment Council, Systemic Advocates in Addictions and Mental Health Interveners
Coram: Wagner C.J. and Abella, Karakatsanis, Côté, Brown, Rowe and Kasirer JJ.
Reasons for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 61)
Brown J. (Wagner C.J. and Abella, Côté, Rowe and Kasirer JJ. concurring)
Dissenting Reasons: (paras. 62 to 131)
Karakatsanis J.
Northern Regional Health Authority Appellant
v.
Linda Horrocks and
Manitoba Human Rights Commission Respondents
and
Attorney General of British Columbia,
Don Valley Community Legal Services,
Canadian Association of Counsel to Employers,
Canadian Human Rights Commission,
British Columbia Council of Administrative Tribunals and
Empowerment Council, Systemic Advocates in
Addictions and Mental Health Interveners
Indexed as: Northern Regional Health Authority v. Horrocks
2021 SCC 42
File No.: 37878.
2021: April 15; 2021: October 22.
Present: Wagner C.J. and Abella, Karakatsanis, Côté, Brown, Rowe and Kasirer JJ.
on appeal from the court of appeal for manitoba
Labour relations — Jurisdiction of arbitrator — Human rights dispute arising from collective agreement — Unionized employee suspended after attending work under influence of alcohol and later terminated for breaching abstinence agreement — Employee filing human rights complaint alleging that employer failed to adequately accommodate disability — Whether exclusive jurisdiction of labour arbitrator appointed under collective agreement and empowered by provincial labour legislation extends to adjudicating human rights disputes arising from collective agreement — The Labour Relations Act, C.C.S.M., c. L10, s. 78 — The Human Rights Code, C.C.S.M., c. H175, ss. 22, 26, 29(3).
H was suspended for attending work under the influence of alcohol. After H disclosed her alcohol addiction and refused to enter into an agreement requiring that she abstain from alcohol and engage in addiction treatment, her employment was terminated. H’s union filed a grievance and her employment was reinstated on substantially the same terms as the agreement H had refused to sign. Shortly thereafter, H’s employment was terminated for an alleged breach of those terms. H filed a discrimination complaint with the Manitoba Human Rights Commission, which was heard by an adjudicator appointed under The Human Rights Code. The employer contested the adjudicator’s jurisdiction, arguing that Weber v. Ontario Hydro, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 929, recognizes exclusive jurisdiction in an arbitrator appointed under a collective agreement, and that this extends to human rights complaints arising from a unionized workplace. The adjudicator disagreed, finding that she had jurisdiction because the essential character of the dispute was an alleged human rights violation. She went on to consider the merits of the complaint and found that the employer had discriminated against H.
On judicial review, the reviewing judge found error in the adjudicator’s characterization of the essential character of the dispute, and set aside her decision on the issue of jurisdiction. The Court of Appeal allowed H’s appeal. It agreed that disputes concerning the termination of a unionized worker lie within the exclusive jurisdiction of a labour arbitrator, including alleged human rights violations. Nevertheless, it held that the adjudicator had jurisdiction in this case and remitted the matter to the reviewing judge to determine whether the adjudicator’s decision on the merits of the complaint was reasonable.
Held (Karakatsanis J. dissenting): The appeal should be allowed and the reviewing judge’s order reinstated in part.
Per Wagner C.J. and Abella, Côté, Brown, Rowe and Kasirer JJ.: The adjudicator did not have jurisdiction over H’s complaint. Where labour legislation provides for the final settlement of disputes arising from a collective agreement, the jurisdiction of the decision‑maker empowered by that legislation — generally, a labour arbitrator — is exclusive. Competing statutory tribunals may carve into that sphere of exclusivity, but only where such legislative intent is clearly expressed. In the instant case, the essential character of H’s complaint falls squarely within the labour arbitrator’s mandate, and there is no clear express legislative intent to grant concurrent jurisdiction to the human rights adjudicator over such disputes. The reviewing judge’s order setting aside the adjudicator’s decision should be reinstated.
Exclusive arbitral jurisdiction, as explained by the Court in Weber, captures disputes that are factually related to the rights and obligations under the collective agreement, even where those same facts give rise to other legal claims based in statute or the common law. The question in each case is whether the dispute, viewed with an eye to its essential character, arises from the collective agreement. However, not all actions in the courts between a unionized employer and employee are precluded, because an arbitrator’s exclusive jurisdiction extends only to disputes that expressly or inferentially arise out of the collective agreement, and not every workplace dispute will fall within this scope. In addition, the exclusive jurisdiction of a labour arbitrator is subject to the residual curial jurisdiction to grant remedies that lie outside the remedial authority of a labour arbitrator.
When it has considered the relationship between the respective spheres of jurisdiction held by labour arbitrators and statutory tribunals, the Court has affirmed that Weber’s exclusive jurisdiction model applies — where matters arise from the interpretation, application, administration or violation of the collective agreement, the claimant must proceed by arbitration and no other forum has the power to entertain an action in respect of that dispute. Weber does not stand for the proposition that labour arbitrators always have exclusive jurisdiction in employer-union disputes; rather, depending on the legislation and the nature of the dispute, other tribunals may possess overlapping jurisdiction, concurrent jurisdiction, or themselves be endowed with exclusive jurisdiction.
However, exclusive arbitral jurisdiction is not a mere preference that should be disregarded whenever a competing statutory scheme is present, but an interpretation of the mandate given to arbitrators by statute. The unavoidable conclusion to be drawn from the Court’s jurisprudence is that mandatory dispute resolution clauses signal a legislative intention to confer exclusive jurisdiction on the labour arbitrator or other dispute resolution forum provided for under the agreement. The text and purpose of a mandatory dispute resolution clause remains unchanged, irrespective of the existence or nature of competing regimes, and its interpretation must therefore remain consistent. Conditioning the effect of a mandatory dispute resolution clause on the nature of the competing forum would result in persistent jurisdictional confusion, leaving members of the public unsure where to turn to resolve a dispute.
It is therefore necessary to consider whether a competing statutory scheme demonstrates an intention to displace the arbitrator’s exclusive jurisdiction. In some cases, it may enact a complete code that confers exclusive jurisdiction over certain kinds of disputes on a competing tribunal; in other cases, the legislation may endow a competing tribunal with concurrent jurisdiction over disputes that would otherwise fall solely to the labour arbitrator for decision. However, the mere existence of a competing tribunal is insufficient to displace labour arbitration as the sole forum for disputes arising from a collective agreement; some positive expression of the legislature’s will is necessary. Where a legislature intends concurrent jurisdiction, it will specifically so state in the competing tribunal’s enabling statute. But even absent specific language, the statutory scheme may disclose that intention: in some statutes, certain provisions necessarily imply that the tribunal has concurrent jurisdiction over disputes that are also subject to the grievance process, or the legislative history will show that the legislature contemplated concurrency. In these circumstances, an exclusive arbitral jurisdiction model would defeat, not achieve, the legislative intent.
Accordingly, resolving jurisdictional contests between labour arbitrators and competing statutory tribunals entails a two-step analysis. First, the relevant legislation must be examined to determine whether it grants the arbitrator exclusive jurisdiction and, if so, over what matters. Where the legislation includes a mandatory dispute resolution clause, an arbitrator empowered under that clause has the exclusive jurisdiction to decide all disputes arising from the collective agreement, subject to clearly expressed legislative intent to the contrary. Secondly, if it is determined that the arbitrator has exclusive jurisdiction, the next step is to determine whether the dispute falls within the scope of that jurisdiction. The scope will depend on the precise language of the statute but, in general, it will extend to all disputes that arise, in their essential character, from the interpretation, application, or alleged violation of the collective agreement. This requires analysing the ambit of the collective agreement and accounting for the factual circumstances underpinning the dispute. The relevant inquiry is into the facts alleged, and not the legal characterization of the matter.
In the present case, two statutes are relevant. First, The Labour Relations Act contains, in s. 78, a mandatory dispute resolution clause that discloses a legislative intent to grant exclusive jurisdiction to the labour arbitrator over all disputes arising from the collective agreement. Secondly, s. 22(1) of The Human Rights Code provides that any person may file a complaint alleging that another person has contravened the Code, and ss. 26 and 29(3) direct the Commission to investigate complaints and, where appropriate, to request the designation of an adjudicator to hear the complaint. While such provisions vest broad jurisdiction in the Commission over Code violations, they are — absent express displacement of the exclusive jurisdiction of a labour arbitrator — insufficient to support a finding that the Commission holds concurrent jurisdiction. Thus, the arbitrator’s jurisdiction under The Labour Relations Act over disputes that arise, in their essential character, from the interpretation, application, or alleged violation of the collective agreement is exclusive and, more particularly, exclusive of the Commission. The essential character of H’s complaint, which arises from the employer’s exercise of its rights under, and from its alleged violation of, the collective agreement, represents such a dispute. The claim therefore falls solely to an arbitrator to adjudicate. While H alleges a human rights violation, this is not sufficient to displace the exclusive jurisdiction of the labour arbitrator.
Per Karakatsanis J. (dissenting): The appeal should be dismissed. The statutory schemes under The Labour Relations Act and The Human Rights Code point to concurrent jurisdiction. Although labour arbitration may well have been the more appropriate forum, the adjudicator was not wrong to conclude that she had jurisdiction, nor was she wrong to rule on the merits.
Deciding jurisdictional issues between two tribunals involves a two-step analysis. The first step is to consider both statutory schemes to determine whether the legislature intended for exclusive or concurrent jurisdiction. A liberal interpretation of the legislation is required to ensure that a scheme is not offended by the conferral of jurisdiction on a forum not intended by the legislature, or by ousting the jurisdiction of the intended forum. The second step is to consider the essential character of the dispute to determine whether it falls within one or both of the statutory schemes. This inquiry turns on the facts of the dispute rather than the legal characterization of the claim.
Apart from establishing this framework, the Court’s jurisprudence does not provide a rule that, absent express legislative intent to the contrary, arbitral jurisdiction is exclusive over disputes that fall within the scope of a collective agreement, nor a rebuttable rule that the exclusive jurisdiction model, followed in Weber, applies in every case involving two statutory tribunals. Generally, when statutory tribunals are established, courts should give way to the special grant of jurisdiction given to such tribunals so as not to undermine the benefits intended by the legislature, including the provision of speedy and affordable dispute resolution. However, the reasoning from Weber favouring exclusive labour arbitration over civil litigation in the courts does not readily apply to jurisdictional issues between different statutory tribunals. When two tribunals are created with overlapping mandates and areas of expertise, the legislative schemes must be viewed as a whole. The legislature may very well have assigned the same tasks to two forums and may have intended for more than one adjudicative body to have jurisdiction over a dispute.
Turning to the first step of the analysis in the instant case, The Labour Relations Act confers broad jurisdiction to arbitrators to deal with matters related to a collective agreement. However, the Act does not specifically oust the Commission’s jurisdiction under The Human Rights Code. Nor does anything in the Code oust the Commission’s jurisdiction over a unionized employee, or oust the jurisdiction of the arbitrator under the Act. Nothing in either scheme suggests the legislature meant for one scheme to prevail over the other. There is no doubt that the labour scheme is designed to rely heavily upon arbitration for matters within the scope of a collective agreement. But so too does the human rights scheme rely heavily upon the Commission to address discrimination. In the jurisprudence, the jurisdiction of human rights tribunals has only been ousted when the statutory text of the other tribunal has specifically excluded all other decision‑making bodies, thereby indicating that jurisdiction was meant to be exclusive. No such express or strong language exists in The Labour Relations Act. The Act does not clearly confer exclusive jurisdiction on labour arbitrators, and The Human Rights Code does not remove human rights complaints of unionized employees from the Commission’s jurisdiction.
Under the second step of the analysis, the Court must consider the essential nature of H’s dispute to determine whether it falls within the jurisdiction of a labour arbitrator, or that of the Commission, or both. The claim is about whether H’s employer discriminated against her on the basis of mental or physical disability — and therefore violated the collective agreement and The Human Rights Code — when it terminated her employment for allegedly violating her undertaking to abstain from alcohol. This dispute falls within the scope of the collective agreement, which specifically prohibits the employer from discriminating on the basis of disability and provides a grievance and arbitration procedure for any dispute arising out of the agreement’s interpretation, application, or alleged violation. Given this context, H’s discrimination claim can easily be characterized as arising out of an alleged violation of the collective agreement. A labour arbitrator accordingly has jurisdiction over it. However, the dispute also falls within the Commission’s jurisdiction and within the mandate of the Code, as does the processing of H’s complaint. There is no exception for a complaint made by a unionized employee who may be subject to a collective agreement. H’s claim thus falls within both a labour arbitrator’s mandate under The Labour Relations Act and the Commission’s mandate under The Human Rights Code.
There is agreement with the majority that where two tribunals have concurrent jurisdiction over a dispute, the decision‑maker must consider whether to exercise its jurisdiction in the circumstances of a particular case. When the Commission shares jurisdiction with a labour arbitrator over a human rights dispute, a number of factors may guide the Commission’s discretion to hear the complaint of a unionized employee, including: whether the claim is about the collective agreement itself rather than a violation of it; whether the union involved is opposed in interest to the complainant such that they could be left without legal recourse; whether a labour arbitrator would not have jurisdiction over every party possibly affected; and whether the Commission is a better fit.
These factors have different implications for the exercise of discretion. If the union is adverse in interest or is unwilling to pursue a grievance, unionized employees should still have legal recourse to adjudicate their human rights complaints before the Commission. Conversely, if the claim is about the violation of the collective agreement, if the union is supportive, and if the arbitrator has jurisdiction over the necessary parties, there will be a compelling case for a human rights forum to defer to the labour arbitration regime. Additionally, an inquiry into which forum is a better fit permits a broad consideration of the circumstances of the complaint. The remedy sought by the complainant may be highly relevant. If a complainant seeks a declaration, damages, or systemic changes, a human rights tribunal may be the better fit. On the other hand, if a complainant seeks reinstatement, there is a strong case for labour arbitration to have primary responsibility. Finally, access to justice and efficiency favour deferring to labour arbitration. As a general rule, the Commission should decline jurisdiction unless labour arbitration is not a realistic alternative.
In the present case, there was no clear evidence before the human rights adjudicator that the union would not assist or support H. And there are good reasons why the Commission or the adjudicator could have exercised their discretion to defer to the labour arbitration scheme: the dispute was about discrimination arising under the collective agreement, and the remedy sought — reinstatement — was squarely within the powers of a labour arbitrator. However, because the human rights adjudicator in this case clearly had jurisdiction, it cannot be said that she was wrong to proceed. In any event, it would not be appropriate, nearly a decade after the events giving rise to the dispute and over six years after the adjudicator’s decision on the merits, to set aside the adjudicator’s decision on jurisdiction. The remedies available on judicial review are discretionary and reflect a public interest in the orderly administration of affairs, including the need for finality and certainty.
Cases Cited
By Brown J.
Applied: Weber v. Ontario Hydro, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 929; Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Vavilov, 2019 SCC 65; Agraira v. Canada (Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness), 2013 SCC 36, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 559; considered: St. Anne Nackawic Pulp & Paper Co. v. Canadian Paper Workers Union, Local 219, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 704; Regina Police Assn. Inc. v. Regina (City) Board of Police Commissioners, 2000 SCC 14, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 360; Quebec (Commission des droits de la personne et des droits de la jeunesse) v. Quebec (Attorney General), 2004 SCC 39, [2004] 2 S.C.R. 185; Quebec (Attorney General) v. Quebec (Human Rights Tribunal), 2004 SCC 40, [2004] 2 S.C.R. 223; Canada (House of Commons) v. Vaid, 2005 SCC 30, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 667; referred to: Stene v. Telus Communications Company, 2019 BCCA 215, 24 B.C.L.R. (6th) 74; Bruce v. Cohon, 2017 BCCA 186, 97 B.C.L.R. (5th) 296; Cherubini Metal Works Ltd. v. Nova Scotia (Attorney General), 2007 NSCA 38, 253 N.S.R. (2d) 144; Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235; Syncrude Canada Ltd. v. Canada (Attorney General), 2016 FCA 160, 398 D.L.R. (4th) 91; New Brunswick v. O’Leary, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 967; Allen v. Alberta, 2003 SCC 13, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 128; Goudie v. Ottawa (City), 2003 SCC 14, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 141; Bisaillon v. Concordia University, 2006 SCC 19, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 666; Parry Sound (District) Social Services Administration Board v. O.P.S.E.U., Local 324, 2003 SCC 42, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 157; Wainwright v. Vancouver Shipyards Co. (1987), 14 B.C.L.R. (2d) 247; Johnston v. Dresser Industries Canada Ltd. (1990), 75 O.R. (2d) 609; Côté v. Saiano, [1998] R.J.Q. 1965; Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employees Canadian Pacific System Federation v. Canadian Pacific Ltd., [1996] 2 S.C.R. 495; A.T.U., Local 583 v. Calgary (City), 2007 ABCA 121, 75 Alta. L.R. (4th) 75; Calgary Health Region v. Alberta (Human Rights & Citizenship Commission), 2007 ABCA 120, 74 Alta. L.R. (4th) 23; Human Rights Commission (N.S.) v. Halifax (Regional Municipality), 2008 NSCA 21, 264 N.S.R. (2d) 61; Canpar Industries v. I.U.O.E., Local 115, 2003 BCCA 609, 20 B.C.L.R. (4th) 301; Insurance Corp. of British Columbia v. Heerspink, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 145; Cadillac Fairview Corp. v. Human Rights Commission (Sask.) (1999), 177 Sask. R. 126; Ford Motor Co. of Canada Ltd. v. Ontario (Human Rights Commission) (2001), 209 D.L.R. (4th) 465; Central Okanagan School District No. 23 v. Renaud, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 970; Noël v. Société d’énergie de la Baie James, 2001 SCC 39, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 207; McLeod v. Egan, [1975] 1 S.C.R. 517.
By Karakatsanis J. (dissenting)
Weber v. Ontario Hydro, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 929; Quebec (Commission des droits de la personne et des droits de la jeunesse) v. Quebec (Attorney General), 2004 SCC 39, [2004] 2 S.C.R. 185; Regina Police Assn. Inc. v. Regina (City) Board of Police Commissioners, 2000 SCC 14, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 360; Parry Sound (District) Social Services Administration Board v. O.P.S.E.U., Local 324, 2003 SCC 42, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 157; Quebec (Attorney General) v. Quebec (Human Rights Tribunal), 2004 SCC 40, [2004] 2 S.C.R. 223; Bisaillon v. Concordia University, 2006 SCC 19, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 666; St. Anne Nackawic Pulp & Paper Co. v. Canadian Paper Workers Union, Local 219, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 704; Ford Motor Co. of Canada Ltd. v. Ontario (Human Rights Commission) (2001), 209 D.L.R. (4th) 465; Greater Essex District School Board and OSSTF (OMERS Pension Plan), Re (2015), 256 L.A.C. (4th) 1; Human Rights Commission (N.S.) v. Halifax (Regional Municipality), 2008 NSCA 21, 264 N.S.R. (2d) 61; Calgary Health Region v. Alberta (Human Rights & Citizenship Commission), 2007 ABCA 120, 74 Alta. L.R. (4th) 23; Université de Sherbrooke v. Commission des droits de la personne et des droits de la jeunesse, 2015 QCCA 1397; Gendron v. Supply and Services Union of the Public Service Alliance of Canada, Local 50057, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1298; Mason v. Gen‑Auto Shippers and Teamsters Local Union 938, [1999] OLRB Rep. 242; Creed v. International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local Union 339, [1999] O.L.R.D. No. 3422 (QL); Tranchemontagne v. Ontario (Director, Disability Support Program), 2006 SCC 14, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 513; Canada (House of Commons) v. Vaid, 2005 SCC 30, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 667; Haaretz.com v. Goldhar, 2018 SCC 28, [2018] 2 S.C.R. 3; Halifax (Regional Municipality) v. Nova Scotia (Human Rights Commission), 2012 SCC 10, [2012] 1 S.C.R. 364; Blatz v. 4L Communications Inc., 2012 CanLII 42311; Qumsieh v. Brandon School Division, 2019 MBHR 3; British Columbia (Workers’ Compensation Board) v. Figliola, 2011 SCC 52, [2011] 3 S.C.R. 422; Zulkoskey v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Social Development), 2016 FCA 268; Dick v. Pepsi Bottling Group (Canada), Co., 2014 CanLII 16055; A.T.U., Local 583 v. Calgary (City), 2007 ABCA 121, 75 Alta. L.R. (4th) 75; Strickland v. Canada (Attorney General), 2015 SCC 37, [2015] 2 S.C.R. 713; Canada (Citizenship and Immigration) v. Khosa, 2009 SCC 12, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 339; Fingland v. Ontario (Ministry of Transportation), 2008 ONCA 812, 93 O.R. (3d) 268; Chippewas of Sarnia Band v. Canada (Attorney General) (2000), 51 O.R. (3d) 641.
Statutes and Regulations Cited
Canada Labour Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. L‑2, ss. 16(l.1), 57(1), 98(3).
Canadian Human Rights Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. H‑6, ss. 41, 42.
Human Rights Code, C.C.S.M., c. H175, preamble, ss. 4, 7(2)(a), 14, 22(1), 26, 29(3), 34, 42, 43(2), 58.
Human Rights Code, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 210, s. 25.
Human Rights Code, R.S.O. 1990, c. H.19, s. 45.1.
Industrial Relations Act, R.S.N.B. 1973, c. I‑4, s. 55.
Labour Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, c. L‑1, s. 37.
Labour Code, CQLR, c. C‑27, s. 100.
Labour Relations Act, C.C.S.M., c. L10, ss. 7, 20, 78, 121(2).
Labour Relations Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. L‑1, s. 86.
Labour Relations Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.2, s. 45(1).
Labour Relations Act, 1995, S.O. 1995, c. 1, Sch. A, s. 48.
Labour Relations Code, R.S.A. 2000, c. L‑1, ss. 135, 136.
Labour Relations Code, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 244, s. 84(2), (3).
Manitoba Hydro Act, C.C.S.M., c. H190, s. 22.
Manitoba Public Insurance Corporation Act, C.C.S.M., c. P215, s. 65(13).
Residential Tenancies Act, C.C.S.M., c. R119, ss. 152(1), 158(1).
Trade Union Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 475, s. 42.
Trade Union Act, R.S.S. 1978, c. T‑17, s. 26.
Workers Compensation Act, C.C.S.M., c. W200, ss. 60(1), 60.8(1).
Authors Cited
Adams, George W. Canadian Labour Law, 2nd ed. Toronto: Thomson Reuters, 2021 (loose‑leaf updated June 2021, release 2).
Brown, Donald J. M., with the assistance of David Fairlie. Civil Appeals. Toronto: Thomson Reuters, 2019 (loose‑leaf updated July 2021, release 2).
Brown, Donald J. M., and John M. Evans, with the assistance of David Fairlie. Judicial Review of Administrative Action in Canada. Toronto: Thomson Reuters, 2013 (loose‑leaf updated July 2021, release 2).
Etherington, Brian. “Weber, and Almost Everything After, Twenty Years Later: Its Impact on Individual Charter, Common Law, and Statutory Rights Claims”, in Elizabeth Shilton and Karen Schucher, eds., One Law for All? Weber v Ontario Hydro and Canadian Labour Law: Essays in Memory of Bernie Adell. Toronto: Irwin Law, 2017, 25.
Evans, John M. “The Role of Appellate Courts in Administrative Law” (2007), 20 C.J.A.L.P. 1.
Gagnon, Jean Denis. “Les droits de la personne dans un contexte de rapports collectifs de travail. Compétence de l’arbitre et d’autres tribunaux. Quand l’incertitude devient la règle” (2006), 66 R. du B. 1.
Gall, Peter A., Andrea L. Zwack and Kate Bayne. “Determining Human Rights Issues in the Unionized Workplace: The Case for Exclusive Arbitral Jurisdiction” (2005), 12 C.L.E.L.J. 381.
Lokan, Andrew K., and Maryth Yachnin. “From Weber to Parry Sound: The Expanded Scope of Arbitration” (2004), 11 C.L.E.L.J. 1.
Manitoba Human Rights Commission. Board of Commissioners. Policy # P-3: Jurisdiction — Concurrent Jurisdiction, December 18, 2002, revised October 8, 2014 (online: http://www.manitobahumanrights.ca/v1/education-resources/resources/pubs/board-of-commisioner-policies/p-3.pdf; archived version: https://www.scc-csc.ca/cso-dce/2021SCC-CSC42_1_eng.pdf).
Mummé, Claire. “Questions, Questions: Has Weber Had an Impact on Unions’ Representational Responsibilities in Workplace Human Rights Disputes?”, in Elizabeth Shilton and Karen Schucher, eds., One Law for All? Weber v Ontario Hydro and Canadian Labour Law: Essays in Memory of Bernie Adell. Toronto: Irwin Law, 2017, 229.
Pickel, Jo‑Anne. “Statutory Tribunals and the Challenges of Managing Parallel Claims”, in Elizabeth Shilton and Karen Schucher, eds., One Law for All? Weber v Ontario Hydro and Canadian Labour Law: Essays in Memory of Bernie Adell. Toronto: Irwin Law, 2017, 175.
Shilton, Elizabeth. “Choice, but No Choice: Adjudicating Human Rights Claims in Unionized Workplaces in Canada” (2013), 38 Queen’s L.J. 461.
Shilton, Elizabeth. “‘Everybody’s Business’: Human Rights Enforcement and the Union’s Duty To Accommodate” (2014), 18 C.L.E.L.J. 209.
Shilton, Elizabeth. “Labour Arbitration and Public Rights Claims: Forcing Square Pegs into Round Holes” (2016), 41 Queen’s L.J. 275.
APPEAL from a judgment of the Manitoba Court of Appeal (Monnin, Mainella and Pfuetzner JJ.A.), 2017 MBCA 98, [2018] 1 W.W.R. 77, 27 Admin. L.R. (6th) 95, 416 D.L.R. (4th) 385, 43 C.C.E.L. (4th) 16, 88 C.H.R.R. D/1, 2018 CLLC 230‑009, [2017] M.J. No. 274 (QL), 2017 CarswellMan 458 (WL Can.), setting aside a decision of Edmond J., 2016 MBQB 89, 327 Man. R. (2d) 284, [2016] 11 W.W.R. 297, 33 C.C.E.L. (4th) 323, 84 C.H.R.R. D/67, [2016] CLLC 230‑031, [2016] M.J. No. 127 (QL), 2016 CarswellMan 155 (WL Can.). Appeal allowed, Karakatsanis J. dissenting.
Robert Watchman and Todd C. Andres, for the appellant.
Paul Champ and Bijon Roy, for the respondent Linda Horrocks.
Thor J. Hansell and Shea Garber, for the respondent the Manitoba Human Rights Commission.
Robert Danay, for the intervener the Attorney General of British Columbia.
Busayo A. Faderin, for the intervener Don Valley Community Legal Services.
Craig W. Neuman, Q.C., for the intervener the Canadian Association of Counsel to Employers.
Brian Smith, for the intervener the Canadian Human Rights Commission.
Oliver Pulleyblank, for the intervener the British Columbia Council of Administrative Tribunals.
Karen R. Spector, for the intervener the Empowerment Council, Systemic Advocates in Addictions and Mental Health.
The judgment of Wagner C.J. and Abella, Côté, Brown, Rowe and Kasirer JJ. was delivered by
Brown J. —
I. Introduction
[1] Labour relations legislation across Canada requires every collective agreement to include a clause providing for the final settlement of all differences concerning the interpretation, application or alleged violation of the agreement, by arbitration or otherwise. The precedents of this Court have maintained that the jurisdiction conferred upon the decision‑maker appointed thereunder is exclusive. At issue in this case, principally, is whether that exclusive jurisdiction held by labour arbitrators in Manitoba extends to adjudicating claims of discrimination that, while falling within the scope of the collective agreement, might also support a human rights complaint.
[2] The respondent Linda Horrocks says that her employer, the appellant, the Northern Regional Health Authority (“NRHA”), failed to adequately accommodate her disability. In 2011, she was suspended for attending work under the influence of alcohol. After she disclosed her alcohol addiction and refused to enter into a “last chance agreement” requiring that she abstain from alcohol and engage in addiction treatment, the NRHA terminated her employment. Ms. Horrocks’ union filed a grievance, which was settled by an agreement reinstating her employment on substantially the same terms as the last chance agreement. Shortly thereafter, the NRHA terminated her employment for an alleged breach of those terms.
[3] Ms. Horrocks filed a complaint with the respondent, the Manitoba Human Rights Commission, which was heard by an adjudicator appointed under The Human Rights Code, C.C.S.M., c. H175. The NRHA contested the adjudicator’s jurisdiction to hear the complaint, arguing that this Court’s judgment in Weber v. Ontario Hydro, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 929, recognizes exclusive jurisdiction in an arbitrator appointed under a collective agreement, and that this jurisdiction extends to human rights complaints arising from a unionized workplace. Chief Adjudicator Walsh disagreed, finding that she had jurisdiction. While Weber does recognize exclusive jurisdiction in labour arbitrators over disputes that arise from the interpretation, application, administration, or violation of a collective agreement, the essential character of this dispute, she held, was an alleged human rights violation (2015 MBHR 3, 83 C.H.R.R. D/45). Chief Adjudicator Walsh went on to consider the merits of the complaint and found that the NRHA had discriminated against Ms. Horrocks.
[4] On judicial review, Edmond J. found error in the adjudicator’s characterization of the essential character of the dispute, and set aside the adjudicator’s decision on the issue of jurisdiction. As he saw it, the essential character of the dispute was whether the NRHA had just cause to terminate Ms. Horrocks’ employment (2016 MBQB 89, 327 Man. R. (2d) 284). “[A]ny [such] dispute”, he held (at para. 57), “including any human rights violation associated with the termination, is within the exclusive jurisdiction of labour arbitration”. As such, Edmond J. found it unnecessary to decide whether the adjudicator’s decision on the merits of the complaint was reasonable. The Court of Appeal agreed with Edmond J.’s conclusion that disputes concerning the termination of a unionized worker lie within the exclusive jurisdiction of a labour arbitrator, including where the dispute alleges human rights violations (2017 MBCA 98, 416 D.L.R. (4th) 385). Nevertheless, it held that the adjudicator had jurisdiction for several reasons:
(a) Ms. Horrocks “made a choice to sever” the employment and human rights aspects of her claim by not grieving her second termination (para. 80);
(b) The discrimination claim raised issues that “transcend[ed]” the specific employment context, because an employer’s accommodation of an employee’s alcohol dependency is “larger than the specifics of what occurred in the employment relationship” (para. 85); and
(c) The union was not interested in pursuing arbitration, thus precluding Ms. Horrocks from bringing her claim to any forum if a labour arbitrator were to hold exclusive jurisdiction (para. 87).
In the result, the Court of Appeal allowed the appeal and remitted the matter to the Court of Queen’s Bench to determine whether the adjudicator’s decision on the merits of the discrimination complaint was reasonable.
[5] For the reasons that follow, I find myself in respectful disagreement with the adjudicator and the Court of Appeal. Properly understood, this Court’s jurisprudence has consistently affirmed that, where labour legislation provides for the final settlement of disputes arising from a collective agreement, the jurisdiction of the decision‑maker empowered by that legislation — generally, a labour arbitrator — is exclusive. Competing statutory tribunals may carve into that sphere of exclusivity, but only where that legislative intent is clearly expressed. Here, the combined effect of the collective agreement and The Labour Relations Act, C.C.S.M., c. L10, is to mandate arbitration of “all differences” concerning the “meaning, application, or alleged violation” of the collective agreement (s. 78(1)). In its essential character, Ms. Horrocks’ complaint alleges a violation of the collective agreement, and thus falls squarely within the arbitrator’s mandate. The Human Rights Code does not clearly express legislative intent to grant concurrent jurisdiction to the adjudicator over such disputes. It follows that the adjudicator did not have jurisdiction over the complaint, and the appeal should be allowed.
II. Issues
[6] As noted, the principal issue arising is whether the exclusive jurisdiction of a labour arbitrator appointed under a collective agreement extends to human rights disputes that arise therefrom. But two preliminary issues were also put to us by the parties: first, the standard of review applicable to an administrative decision concerning the jurisdictional lines between two tribunals; and secondly, the standard of review applicable on appeal from a judicial review of an administrative decision.
III. Analysis
A. Standard of Review
(1) Administrative Standard of Review
[7] Decisions concerning the jurisdictional lines between two or more administrative bodies must be correct (Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Vavilov, 2019 SCC 65, at para. 53). This standard safeguards the rule of law, which “requires courts to intervene where one administrative body has interpreted the scope of its authority in a manner that is incompatible with the jurisdiction of another” (para. 64). It also fosters predictability, finality and certainty in the law (ibid.).
[8] Here, the reviewing judge and the Court of Appeal applied the correctness standard to the adjudicator’s decision. The Commission acknowledges that this is faithful to Vavilov, but argues that the determination of jurisdictional lines involves a fact‑specific inquiry into the “essential character” of a dispute, which ought to attract deference (R.F., at paras. 75-84). It therefore invites the Court to reconsider the established standard.
[9] I am not persuaded that such reconsideration is necessary or desirable. As I will explain below, correctly determining the jurisdictional lines between two administrative bodies requires that a decision‑maker correctly identify the essential character of the dispute. Applying a reasonableness standard to this component of the analysis would undermine the objective of ensuring that one adjudicative body does not trespass on the jurisdiction of the other. I note as well that appellate authority concerning the jurisdictional lines between courts and tribunals has generally held that the essential character determination is reviewed for correctness (Stene v. Telus Communications Company, 2019 BCCA 215, 24 B.C.L.R. (6th) 74, at para. 38; Bruce v. Cohon, 2017 BCCA 186, 97 B.C.L.R. (5th) 296, at para. 80; Cherubini Metal Works Ltd. v. Nova Scotia (Attorney General), 2007 NSCA 38, 253 N.S.R. (2d) 144, at para. 12). These authorities explain that this is so notwithstanding the fact‑specific nature of the essential character inquiry, because it grounds a determination of jurisdiction.
(2) Appellate Standard of Review
[10] A reviewing judge’s selection and application of the standard of review is reviewable for correctness. This standard traces back to Agraira v. Canada (Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness), 2013 SCC 36, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 559, where LeBel J. explained:
The proper approach to this issue was set out by the Federal Court of Appeal in Telfer v. Canada Revenue Agency, 2009 FCA 23, 386 N.R. 212, at para. 18:
Despite some earlier confusion, there is now ample authority for the proposition that, on an appeal from a decision disposing of an application for judicial review, the question for the appellate court to decide is simply whether the court below identified the appropriate standard of review and applied it correctly. The appellate court is not restricted to asking whether the first‑level court committed a palpable and overriding error in its application of the appropriate standard.
In Merck Frosst Canada Ltd. v. Canada (Health), 2012 SCC 3, [2012] 1 S.C.R. 23, at para. 247, Deschamps J. aptly described this process as “‘step[ping] into the shoes’ of the lower court” such that the “appellate court’s focus is, in effect, on the administrative decision” (emphasis deleted).
The issue for our consideration can thus be summarized as follows: Did the application judge choose the correct standard of review and apply it properly? [Text in brackets in original; paras. 45-47.]
This approach accords no deference to the reviewing judge’s application of the standard of review. Rather, the appellate court performs a de novo review of the administrative decision (D. J. M. Brown, with the assistance of D. Fairlie, Civil Appeals (loose-leaf), at §14:45).
[11] The approach to appellate review prescribed in Agraira is different than that set out in Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235. Where Housen applies, the degree of deference accorded to the original decision‑maker depends on the type of error at issue: errors of law are reviewed on the correctness standard, while errors of fact and mixed fact and law attract the palpable and overriding error standard. The NRHA invites the Court to reconsider Agraira, saying that a de novo review of administrative decisions renders the first level of review a “necessary but feckless step in the judicial review of an administrative decision” (A.F., at para. 6). In its submission, no principled reason precludes applying the standards of review stated in Housen to an appeal from a judicial review decision.
[12] I would decline the invitation to reconsider Agraira, which is a recent decision of the Court and remains good law. Of course, there may be good reason to apply the Housen standard where a reviewing judge acts as a decision-maker of first instance (the Hon. J. M. Evans, “The Role of Appellate Courts in Administrative Law” (2007), 20 C.J.A.L.P. 1, at pp. 30-34; Brown, at §14:46; Syncrude Canada Ltd. v. Canada (Attorney General), 2016 FCA 160, 398 D.L.R. (4th) 91, at para. 29), but this does not provide a reason for applying Housen to the selection and application of the standard of review. In any event, however, this point makes no difference to NRHA’s appeal. As indicated, the adjudicator’s finding that she had jurisdiction is reviewable for correctness. And if the adjudicator was bound to correctly determine her own jurisdiction, it follows that the reviewing judge was also bound to apply the same standard in reviewing the adjudicator’s decision. Concluding otherwise would allow an incorrect determination of jurisdictional lines to stand, which would undermine the values of certainty and predictability that justified the application of the correctness standard in the first instance. Even under Housen, no deference would have been owed to the reviewing judge’s analysis.
B. The Adjudicator’s Jurisdiction
[13] It is settled law that the scope of a labour arbitrator’s jurisdiction precludes curial recourse in disputes that arise from a collective agreement, even where such disputes also give rise to common law or statutory claims (St. Anne Nackawic Pulp & Paper Co. v. Canadian Paper Workers Union, Local 219, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 704, at p. 721; Weber, at para. 54; New Brunswick v. O’Leary, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 967; Allen v. Alberta, 2003 SCC 13, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 128, at paras. 12‑17; Goudie v. Ottawa (City), 2003 SCC 14, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 141, at paras. 22‑23; Bisaillon v. Concordia University, 2006 SCC 19, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 666, at para. 30). It is similarly beyond dispute that labour arbitrators may apply human rights legislation to disputes arising from the collective agreement (Parry Sound (District) Social Services Administration Board v. O.P.S.E.U., Local 324, 2003 SCC 42, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 157, at paras. 1 and 28‑29; Weber, at para. 56). Indeed, it has been observed that labour arbitration is the primary forum for the enforcement of human rights in unionized workplaces (E. Shilton, “‘Everybody’s Business’: Human Rights Enforcement and the Union’s Duty To Accommodate” (2014), 18 C.L.E.L.J. 209, at p. 235; P. A. Gall, A. L. Zwack and K. Bayne, “Determining Human Rights Issues in the Unionized Workplace: The Case for Exclusive Arbitral Jurisdiction” (2005), 12 C.L.E.L.J. 381, at p. 397).
[14] At stake, however — in this appeal and more generally — is whether that observation understates the case: Is labour arbitration merely the primary, as opposed to the exclusive forum for enforcing human rights issues arising from the collective agreement? Ms. Horrocks and the Commission contend that a labour arbitrator’s jurisdiction to apply human rights legislation to such disputes is not exclusive. In their view, arbitral exclusivity applies only to decide jurisdictional contests between labour arbitrators and the courts. Where the competing forum is a statutory tribunal, they say the arbitrator’s jurisdiction is concurrent unless the legislation expressly mandates exclusivity. This applies with particular force to human rights adjudication schemes, given the quasi‑constitutional nature of their enabling legislation. In their view, concluding otherwise would jeopardize access to justice in unionized workplaces.
[15] This argument is unsustainable in light of this Court’s jurisprudence. Properly understood, the decided cases indicate that, where labour legislation provides for the final settlement of disputes arising from a collective agreement, the jurisdiction of the arbitrator or other decision-maker empowered by this legislation is exclusive. This applies irrespective of the nature of the competing forum, but is always subject to clearly expressed legislative intent to the contrary.
(1) Exclusive Arbitral Jurisdiction
[16] Labour relations statutes in Canada generally require that collective agreements include a method for the final settlement of differences concerning the interpretation, application, and alleged violation of the agreement. Some statutes specifically require arbitration of such differences, while others permit the parties to select a different method of dispute resolution. Where a collective agreement does not include a dispute resolution procedure that complies with the statute, it is deemed to include an arbitration clause in prescribed terms. See G. W. Adams, Canadian Labour Law (2nd ed. (loose‑leaf)), at pp. 12-51 to 12-55; The Labour Relations Act, s. 78; Labour Relations Code, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 244, s. 84(2) and (3); Labour Relations Code, R.S.A. 2000, c. L‑1, ss. 135 and 136; The Trade Union Act, R.S.S. 1978, c. T‑17, s. 26; Labour Relations Act, 1995, S.O. 1995, c. 1, Sch. A, s. 48; Labour Code, CQLR, c. C‑27, s. 100; Trade Union Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 475, s. 42; Industrial Relations Act, R.S.N.B. 1973, c. I‑4, s. 55; Labour Relations Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. L‑1, s. 86; Labour Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, c. L‑1, s. 37; Canada Labour Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. L‑2, s. 57(1).
[17] This Court has interpreted such mandatory dispute resolution provisions as conferring exclusive jurisdiction on the decision‑maker appointed thereunder — typically, a labour arbitrator. That understanding originates in St. Anne Nackawic, which concerned an employer’s civil action against a union for damages following an illegal strike. The union raised a preliminary objection to the court’s jurisdiction, arguing that, under s. 55(1) of New Brunswick’s Industrial Relations Act, only a labour arbitrator could adjudicate disputes arising from the collective agreement. That section read as follows:
55(1) Every collective agreement shall provide for the final and binding settlement by arbitration or otherwise, without stoppage of work, of all differences between the parties to, or persons bound by, the agreement or on whose behalf it was entered into, concerning its interpretation, application, administration or an alleged violation of the agreement, including any question as to whether a matter is arbitrable.
[18] The Court found that this section left no room for curial jurisdiction over the claim. Allowing the parties such recourse to enforce the collective agreement would, he explained, undermine the integrity of the labour arbitration scheme and the labour relations system as a whole:
The collective agreement establishes the broad parameters of the relationship between the employer and his employees. This relationship is properly regulated through arbitration and it would, in general, subvert both the relationship and the statutory scheme under which it arises to hold that matters addressed and governed by the collective agreement may nevertheless be the subject of actions in the courts at common law. . . . The more modern approach is to consider that labour relations legislation provides a code governing all aspects of labour relations, and that it would offend the legislative scheme to permit the parties to a collective agreement, or the employees on whose behalf it was negotiated, to have recourse to the ordinary courts which are in the circumstances a duplicative forum to which the legislature has not assigned these tasks.
. . .
. . . if the courts are available to the parties as an alternative forum, violence is done to a comprehensive statutory scheme designed to govern all aspects of the relationship of the parties in a labour relations setting. Arbitration, when adopted by the parties as was done here in the collective agreement, is an integral part of that scheme, and is clearly the forum preferred by the legislature for resolution of disputes arising under collective agreements. From the foregoing authorities, it might be said, therefore, that the law has so evolved that it is appropriate to hold that the grievance and arbitration procedures provided for by the Act and embodied by legislative prescription in the terms of a collective agreement provide the exclusive recourse open to parties to the collective agreement for its enforcement. [Emphasis added; pp. 718‑19 and 721.]
[19] In Weber, the Court elaborated upon the scope of exclusive arbitral jurisdiction identified in St. Anne Nackawic, holding that it also ousted curial jurisdiction over tort and Charter claims arising from a collective agreement. There, an employer had hired private investigators to determine whether an employee was abusing his sick leave benefits. The investigators gained entry to the employee’s home by assuming a false identity, and obtained information that led to the employee’s termination. The employee filed a grievance seeking damages for mental anguish caused by the surveillance, which was settled. Further, he commenced a civil action alleging trespass, nuisance, deceit, invasion of privacy, and breach of his Charter rights. The employer objected, arguing that the dispute related to the sick leave provisions in the collective agreement and thus fell to be decided exclusively by a labour arbitrator.
[20] The Court agreed that the matter fell within exclusive arbitral jurisdiction. That jurisdiction, it explained, captures disputes that are factually related to the rights and obligations under the collective agreement, even where those same facts give rise to other legal claims based in statute or the common law:
The issue is not whether the action, defined legally, is independent of the collective agreement, but rather whether the dispute is one “arising under [the] collective agreement”. Where the dispute, regardless of how it may be characterized legally, arises under the collective agreement, then the jurisdiction to resolve it lies exclusively with the labour tribunal and the courts cannot try it. [Emphasis in original; text in brackets in original; para. 43.]
[21] This analysis reflected the language of the applicable labour relations statute at issue in Weber, which required arbitration of “all differences between the parties arising from the interpretation, application, administration or alleged violation of the agreement” (Labour Relations Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.2, s. 45(1)). As the Court explained, the term “differences” revealed a legislative concern not for the form of legal actions that might be advanced, but for the dispute between the parties (para. 45). Such concern made sense, being consistent with the objectives of the legislation, including the resolution of disputes “quickly and economically, with a minimum of disruption to the parties and the economy” — an objective that “lies at the heart of all Canadian labour statutes” (para. 46 (emphasis added)). In short, and as the Court summarized (at para. 67 (emphasis added)), “[t]he question in each case is whether the dispute, viewed with an eye to its essential character, arises from the collective agreement.”
[22] A word of caution is in order here. The Court was careful to note that “[t]his approach does not preclude all actions in the courts between [a unionized] employer and employee” (para. 54 (emphasis added)). This is because an arbitrator’s exclusive jurisdiction extends only to “disputes which expressly or inferentially arise out of the collective agreement” (ibid.; see also Bisaillon, at paras. 30‑33). Not every workplace dispute will fall within this scope. For example, in Goudie, employees claimed damages under a pre‑employment contract. The Court found that this claim arose from the pre‑employment contract, and not from the collective agreement (at para. 4), and therefore fell outside the arbitrator’s exclusive jurisdiction. (See, similarly, Wainwright v. Vancouver Shipyards Co. (1987), 14 B.C.L.R. (2d) 247 (C.A.); Johnston v. Dresser Industries Canada Ltd. (1990), 75 O.R. (2d) 609 (C.A.); Côté v. Saiano, [1998] R.J.Q. 1965 (C.A.).)
[23] A further caveat: the exclusive jurisdiction of a labour arbitrator is subject to the residual curial jurisdiction to grant remedies that lie outside the remedial authority of a labour arbitrator, including interlocutory injunctions (Weber, at para. 67; see also Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employees Canadian Pacific System Federation v. Canadian Pacific Ltd., [1996] 2 S.C.R. 495; Bisaillon, at para. 42). This ensures that there is no “deprivation of ultimate remedy” (Weber, at para. 57, quoting St. Anne Nackawic, at p. 723).
(a) Exclusive Arbitral Jurisdiction and Statutory Tribunals
[24] This Court has twice considered the relationship between the respective spheres of jurisdiction held by labour arbitrators and statutory tribunals. In each case, it affirmed the exclusivity of arbitral jurisdiction recognized in St. Anne Nackawic and Weber.
[25] In Regina Police Assn. Inc. v. Regina (City) Board of Police Commissioners, 2000 SCC 14, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 360, the issue was whether an arbitrator could hear the grievance of a police officer who resigned after he was informed that he would be charged with discreditable conduct by his employer police service and could be subject to dismissal under The Police Act, 1990, S.S. 1990‑91, c. P‑15.01. The Court found that The Police Act gave police boards exclusive responsibility to resolve disciplinary matters. Because the essential character of the dispute concerned police discipline, it fell exclusively to the board, and not to the arbitrator. Of significance, however, the Court affirmed that, as to matters that do arise from “the interpretation, application, administration or violation of [the] collective agreement”, Weber’s “exclusive jurisdiction model” applies — meaning, “the claimant must proceed by arbitration [and] [n]o other forum has the power to entertain an action in respect of that dispute” (para. 22 (emphasis added)).
[26] This view was consistently maintained in Quebec (Commission des droits de la personne et des droits de la jeunesse) v. Quebec (Attorney General), 2004 SCC 39, [2004] 2 S.C.R. 185 (“Morin”). The case concerned a term in the collective agreement between teachers’ unions and the province stipulating that experience acquired during the 1996‑1997 school year would not be credited for the purposes of calculating seniority and salary increments. This affected young teachers particularly, some of whom filed a complaint with the provincial human rights commission, alleging discrimination on the basis of age contrary to the Quebec Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms, R.S.Q., c. C‑12; the commission then brought the matter before the Quebec Human Rights Tribunal. The Attorney General of Quebec challenged the tribunal’s jurisdiction over the matter, asserting that it fell instead within the exclusive jurisdiction of a labour arbitrator.
[27] The Court explained that it is necessary to examine the relevant legislation in order to determine whether it confers exclusive jurisdiction on the arbitrator and, if so, whether the essential character of the dispute falls within the scope of that jurisdiction. Weber, it explained (at para. 11), “does not stand for the proposition that labour arbitrators always have exclusive jurisdiction in employer‑union disputes. Depending on the legislation and the nature of the dispute, other tribunals may possess overlapping jurisdiction, concurrent jurisdiction, or themselves be endowed with exclusive jurisdiction”. In the case before it, the Court accepted that the mandatory dispute resolution clause in Quebec’s Labour Code did grant an arbitrator exclusive jurisdiction over disputes arising from the operation of the collective agreement (at paras. 16 and 20‑24), but also determined that the dispute in Morin did not fall within that jurisdictional scope; rather than arising from the operation of the collective agreement, it arose out of its negotiation (paras. 24 and 26). McLachlin C.J. explained, for the majority:
Everyone agrees on how the agreement, if valid, should be interpreted and applied. The only question is whether the process leading to the adoption of the alleged discriminatory clause and the inclusion of that clause in the agreement violates the Quebec Charter, rendering it unenforceable. [para. 24]
While, therefore, an arbitrator might have had concurrent jurisdiction over the dispute if it arose “incidentally to a different dispute under the collective agreement”, the dispute in Morin nevertheless fell outside the scope of the arbitrator’s exclusive jurisdiction (para. 27). By contrast, it fell squarely within the mandate of the human rights tribunal, which had generous (but not exclusive) jurisdiction over human rights violations.
[28] To be clear, Morin was decided by applying the analytical framework stated in Weber, which led to the conclusion that the dispute in question fell outside of the ambit of the arbitrator’s exclusive jurisdiction. Significantly, Morin was not decided on the basis that the legislation conferred concurrent jurisdiction on the human rights tribunal over all human rights disputes in unionized workplaces. Such a conclusion would be at odds with the Court’s recognition that the Labour Code conferred exclusive jurisdiction on labour arbitrators over disputes that arise from the operation of collective agreements. It would also be at odds with the Court’s direction that the dispute’s essential character be identified in order to determine whether jurisdiction over its resolution falls exclusively to the arbitrator (E. Shilton, “Choice, but No Choice: Adjudicating Human Rights Claims in Unionized Workplaces in Canada” (2013), 38 Queen’s L.J. 461, at p. 480).
[29] I am aware of several appellate courts having resisted recognizing a labour arbitrator’s jurisdiction in human rights disputes as exclusive, on the basis that the exclusivity model developed in Weber has no application where the competing tribunal is a statutory body. In A.T.U., Local 583 v. Calgary (City), 2007 ABCA 121, 75 Alta. L.R. (4th) 75, for example, the Court of Appeal of Alberta reasoned:
The legislative intent in enacting labour relations regimes and creating arbitration procedures must be respected. In my view, however, it is unwise simply to import the principles developed in cases involving a contest between the courts and arbitration, including the inherent preference for the exclusive jurisdiction of arbitrators often apparent in those cases, into a situation where the court must consider two statutory regimes. In the latter situation there are two legislative intents to consider, not one. If we were to accept exclusive jurisdiction as a starting point, we would run the risk of giving the jurisdictional advantage to one statutory tribunal over another and thereby reducing the efficacy of the second statutory regime. [para. 23]
(See also Calgary Health Region v. Alberta (Human Rights & Citizenship Commission), 2007 ABCA 120, 74 Alta. L.R. (4th) 23, at paras. 25‑30; Human Rights Commission (N.S.) v. Halifax (Regional Municipality), 2008 NSCA 21, 264 N.S.R. (2d) 61, at paras. 45‑46.)
[30] To the extent this passage from A.T.U. suggests that exclusive arbitral jurisdiction is a mere “preference” that should be disregarded wherever a competing statutory scheme is present, I see the matter differently. As I read this Court’s jurisprudence, the unavoidable conclusion to be drawn is that mandatory dispute resolution clauses like those considered in St. Anne Nackawic, Weber and Morin signal a legislative intention to confer exclusive jurisdiction on the labour arbitrator (or other dispute resolution forum provided for under the agreement). This is not a judicial preference, but an interpretation of the mandate given to arbitrators by statute. The text and purpose of a mandatory dispute resolution clause remains unchanged, irrespective of the existence or nature of competing regimes, and its interpretation must therefore also remain consistent.
[31] This conclusion is consistent with the concern expressed in Vavilov for predictability, finality and certainty in respect of jurisdictional lines between competing tribunals. Conditioning the effect of a mandatory dispute resolution clause on the nature of the competing forum would result in persistent jurisdictional confusion, leaving members of the public unsure “where to turn in order to resolve a dispute” (para. 64). Affirming that the same principles apply in every context avoids this state of affairs.
[32] That said, it remains necessary to consider whether the competing statutory scheme demonstrates an intention to displace the arbitrator’s exclusive jurisdiction. In some cases, it may enact a “complete code” that confers exclusive jurisdiction over certain kinds of disputes on a competing tribunal, as it did in Regina Police (see also J.-A. Pickel, “Statutory Tribunals and the Challenges of Managing Parallel Claims”, in E. Shilton and K. Schucher, eds., One Law for All? Weber v Ontario Hydro and Canadian Labour Law: Essays in Memory of Bernie Adell (2017), 175, at pp. 184‑87). In other cases, the legislation may endow a competing tribunal with concurrent jurisdiction over disputes that would otherwise fall solely to the labour arbitrator for decision. And where the legislature so provides, courts must respect that intention.
[33] What Morin indicates, however, is that the mere existence of a competing tribunal is insufficient to displace labour arbitration as the sole forum for disputes arising from a collective agreement. Consequently, some positive expression of the legislature’s will is necessary to achieve that effect. Ideally, where a legislature intends concurrent jurisdiction, it will specifically so state in the tribunal’s enabling statute. But even absent specific language, the statutory scheme may disclose that intention. For example, some statutes specifically empower a decision‑maker to defer consideration of a complaint if it is capable of being dealt with through the grievance process (see, e.g., Human Rights Code, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 210, s. 25; Canada Labour Code, ss. 16(l.1) and 98(3); Canadian Human Rights Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. H‑6, ss. 41 and 42). Such provisions necessarily imply that the tribunal has concurrent jurisdiction over disputes that are also subject to the grievance process. In other cases, the provisions of a statute may be more ambiguous, but the legislative history will plainly show that the legislature contemplated concurrency (see, e.g., Canpar Industries v. I.U.O.E., Local 115, 2003 BCCA 609, 20 B.C.L.R. (4th) 301). In these circumstances, applying an exclusive arbitral jurisdiction model would defeat, not achieve, the legislative intent.
[34] In saying this, I acknowledge that, absent “express and unequivocal language” to the contrary, human rights legislation prevails over all other enactments in the event of a conflict (Insurance Corp. of British Columbia v. Heerspink, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 145, at p. 158). In some cases, appellate courts have concluded that by virtue of this paramount status, express language is required to oust the jurisdiction of a human rights tribunal (Halifax, at paras. 63‑73; Cadillac Fairview Corp. v. Human Rights Commission (Sask.) (1999), 177 Sask. R. 126 (C.A.); Ford Motor Co. of Canada Ltd. v. Ontario (Human Rights Commission) (2001), 209 D.L.R. (4th) 465 (Ont. C.A.) (“Naraine”), at para. 47). Whether that is so I need not decide here. But in light of the jurisprudence of this Court which I have recounted, I am of the view that the inclusion of a mandatory dispute resolution clause in a labour relations statute must qualify as an explicit indication of legislative intent to oust the operation of human rights legislation.
[35] Even were it otherwise, the human rights legislation that applies in this case merely provides that “the substantive rights and obligations in this Code are paramount over the substantive rights and obligations in every other Act of the Legislature” (The Human Rights Code, s. 58). This indicates that while the obligations are “paramount”, the procedures established by The Human Rights Code for enforcing them are not. This is entirely consistent with exclusive arbitral jurisdiction.
(b) Individual Rights, Collective Representation, and Access to Justice
[36] The respondents argue that interpreting the arbitrator’s jurisdiction as exclusive with respect to human rights issues raises access to justice concerns. This is because employees’ access to labour arbitration is controlled by their union. If a union declines to advance a claim to arbitration, the employee is left without recourse (Naraine, at para. 62; A.T.U., at paras. 66‑67). This is said to be particularly undesirable since human rights are “quintessentially individual rights, and their enforcement should lie within the control of the rights holder” (Shilton, “Choice, but No Choice”, at p. 502). The answer to this concern is, however, governed by Weber, inasmuch as this Court placed control over unionized workers’ ability to advance workplace‑related Charter claims — most of which relate no less to “quintessentially individual rights” — in the hands of labour unions.
[37] Furthermore, this concern is mitigated by the union’s duty of fair representation — codified in Manitoba in s. 20 of The Labour Relations Act — which “acts as a check on the principle of exclusivity” (C. Mummé, “Questions, Questions: Has Weber Had an Impact on Unions’ Representational Responsibilities in Workplace Human Rights Disputes?”, in Shilton and Schucher, One Law for All?, 229, at p. 237). Unions themselves are also subject to human rights obligations and may be held directly liable under human rights legislation for engaging in discriminatory conduct, including entering into a discriminatory agreement (The Human Rights Code, s. 14; Central Okanagan School District No. 23 v. Renaud, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 970, at pp. 989‑94).
[38] Of course, there will be instances of a union declining to advance a grievance to arbitration without breaching its duty of fair representation or engaging in discrimination. And, in such cases, the employee will indeed be left without a forum for resolution. But this state of affairs — which, it bears restating, can be undone by clearly expressed legislative intent to the contrary — is a product of the union’s statutorily granted monopoly on representation (Bisaillon, at paras. 24‑28; Noël v. Société d’énergie de la Baie James, 2001 SCC 39, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 207, at para. 41). In other words, it is a product of legislative choice, to which we are bound to give effect.
(c) Summary
[39] To summarize, resolving jurisdictional contests between labour arbitrators and competing statutory tribunals entails a two‑step analysis. First, the relevant legislation must be examined to determine whether it grants the arbitrator exclusive jurisdiction and, if so, over what matters (Morin, at para. 15). Where the legislation includes a mandatory dispute resolution clause, an arbitrator empowered under that clause has the exclusive jurisdiction to decide all disputes arising from the collective agreement, subject to clearly expressed legislative intent to the contrary.
[40] If at the first step it is determined that the legislation grants the labour arbitrator exclusive jurisdiction, the next step is to determine whether the dispute falls within the scope of that jurisdiction (Morin, at paras. 15 and 20; Regina Police, at para. 27). The scope of an arbitrator’s exclusive jurisdiction will depend on the precise language of the statute but, in general, it will extend to all disputes that arise, in their essential character, from the interpretation, application, or alleged violation of the collective agreement. This requires analysing the ambit of the collective agreement and accounting for the factual circumstances underpinning the dispute (Weber, at para. 51). The relevant inquiry is into the facts alleged, not the legal characterization of the matter (Weber, at para. 43; Regina Police, at para. 25; Quebec (Attorney General) v. Quebec (Human Rights Tribunal), 2004 SCC 40, [2004] 2 S.C.R. 223 (“Charette”), at para. 23).
[41] Where two tribunals have concurrent jurisdiction over a dispute, the decision‑maker must consider whether to exercise its jurisdiction in the circumstances of a particular case. For the reasons given below, concurrency does not arise in this case. I would therefore decline to elaborate here on the factors that should guide the determination of the appropriate forum.
[42] Bearing these general principles in mind, I turn to the facts of this case.
(2) Application
(a) The Statutory Scheme
[43] Two statutes are relevant here. First, as already noted, The Labour Relations Act contains a mandatory dispute resolution clause, which states:
78(1) Every collective agreement shall contain a provision for final settlement without stoppage of work, by arbitration or otherwise, of all differences between the parties thereto, or persons bound by the agreement or on whose behalf it was entered into, concerning its meaning, application, or alleged violation.
In this case, the parties chose grievance arbitration as the sole dispute resolution mechanism (“Collective Agreement between: Canadian Union of Public Employees, Local 8600 and Nor-Man Regional Health Authority Inc.”, April 1, 2008, to March 31, 2012, arts. 10 and 11, reproduced in A.R., vol. II, at pp. 19‑22). That method is binding on the parties (s. 78(4)).
[44] Like the mandatory dispute resolution clauses at issue in St. Anne Nackawic, Weber, Regina Police, and Morin, the purpose of s. 78 is to channel all disputes arising from the collective agreement into a single forum for resolution. Like those clauses, it discloses a legislative intent to grant exclusive jurisdiction to the labour arbitrator (or other decision‑maker chosen by the parties) over all disputes arising from the collective agreement.
[45] The second relevant statute here, The Human Rights Code, provides that “[a]ny person may file . . . a complaint alleging that another person has contravened this Code” (s. 22(1)), and directs the Commission to investigate such complaints (s. 26). Where such investigation leads the Commission to conclude that “additional proceedings in respect of the complaint would further the objectives of this Code or assist the Commission in discharging its responsibilities under this Code”, it must either request the designation of an adjudicator to hear the complaint or recommend that the minister commence a prosecution for an alleged contravention of the Code (s. 29(3)). While such provisions vest broad jurisdiction in the Commission over Code violations, they are — absent express displacement of the exclusive jurisdiction of a labour arbitrator established by the mandatory arbitration clause — insufficient to support a finding that the Commission holds concurrent jurisdiction here.
[46] I would therefore conclude that the arbitrator’s jurisdiction under The Labour Relations Act over claims that arise, in their essential character, from the interpretation, application, or alleged violation of the collective agreement is exclusive and, more particularly, exclusive of the Commission.
(b) The Essential Character of the Dispute
[47] Having recognized the arbitrator’s exclusive jurisdiction over disputes whose essential character arises from the interpretation, application or alleged violation of the collective agreement between the NRHA and Ms. Horrocks’ union, it remains for me to consider whether the essential character of Ms. Horrocks’ complaint filed with the Commission represents such a dispute. In my view, it does.
[48] This dispute concerns the NRHA’s response to Ms. Horrocks’ attendance at work under the influence of alcohol, which response included requiring that she sign an abstinence agreement and, after she breached that agreement, terminating her employment. The NRHA says that these steps were necessary to protect its patients. Ms. Horrocks says that other options were available to accomplish the NRHA’s objective.
[49] The collective agreement includes a management rights clause, which entitles the employer to maintain quality patient care; to discipline, suspend, or discharge employees for just cause; and to make, alter, and enforce rules and regulations in a manner that is fair and consistent with the terms of the agreement (art. 301). These rights are expressly limited by a prohibition on discrimination under art. 6 of the collective agreement. They are also implicitly limited by the terms of employment‑related statutes (Parry Sound, at para. 26; McLeod v. Egan, [1975] 1 S.C.R. 517, at p. 523), including the prohibition on discrimination under s. 7 of The Labour Relations Act.
[50] In its essential character, then, Ms. Horrocks’ complaint is that her employer exercised its management rights in a way that was inconsistent with their express and implicit limits. This complaint arises foursquare from the NRHA’s exercise of its rights under, and from its alleged violation of, the collective agreement. While the claim invokes Ms. Horrocks’ statutory rights, those rights are “too closely intertwined with collectively bargained rights to be sensibly separated” and cannot be “meaningfully adjudicated . . . except as part of a public/private package that only a labour arbitrator can deal with” (E. Shilton, “Labour Arbitration and Public Rights Claims: Forcing Square Pegs into Round Holes” (2016), 41 Queen’s L.J. 275, at p. 309). On the authority of this Court’s precedents, the inescapable conclusion is that Ms. Horrock’s claim therefore falls solely to the arbitrator to adjudicate.
[51] The adjudicator, I observe, sought to escape the inescapable by describing the essential character of the dispute as “aris[ing] from an alleged violation of the complainant’s human rights and not out of the ‘interpretation, application, administration or violation of the collective agreement”’ (MBHR reasons, at para. 110; see also Weber, at para. 52). Respectfully, the adjudicator’s error here was to do what Weber directs not to do, by focussing on the legal characterization of Ms. Horrocks’ claim instead of on “whether the facts of the dispute fall within the ambit of the collective agreement” (para. 44). It is of course true that Ms. Horrocks alleges a human rights violation. But were that sufficient to displace the exclusive jurisdiction of the labour arbitrator, exclusive arbitral jurisdiction would be significantly undermined, because every human rights complaint would automatically fall within the jurisdiction of the human rights adjudication system. Again, what matters are the facts of the complaint, not the legal form in which the complaint is advanced.
[52] Moreover, our jurisprudence makes clear that the mere allegation of a human rights violation does not bring a dispute within the jurisdiction of a human rights tribunal. In Charette, for example, the complainant, having been denied social assistance benefits while on maternity leave, alleged that the benefits scheme discriminated against her on the basis of pregnancy. Under the relevant legislation, the Commission des affaires sociales (“CAS”) held exclusive jurisdiction to apply and interpret the benefits scheme. This Court found that, notwithstanding the allegation of discrimination, the essential character of the dispute was Ms. Charette’s entitlement to benefits, which fell within the CAS’s exclusive jurisdiction. In concurring reasons, Binnie J. cited to Weber, cautioning that “one must look not to the legal characterization of the wrong, but to the facts giving rise to the dispute” (para. 37, quoting Weber, at para. 49). In the context of the case, he found that the “wrong” was legally characterizable as “the subject matter of a Charter complaint”, while the “facts giving rise to the dispute” were “the Minister’s discontinuance of an income security benefit, and Ms. Charette’s claim to get it back under an administrative scheme that the legislature in plain words has channelled directly to the CAS” (para. 37).
[53] Similarly, in Canada (House of Commons) v. Vaid, 2005 SCC 30, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 667, a House of Commons employee argued that he was constructively dismissed as a result of workplace harassment and discrimination. The Court held that the allegation of a human rights violation “does not automatically steer the case to the Canadian Human Rights Commission” (para. 93). Looking at the facts underpinning the complaint, the Court found nothing “to lift these complaints out of their specific employment context” (para. 94). It confirmed: “A grievance that raises a human rights issue is nevertheless a grievance for purposes of employment or labour relations . . .” (para. 95).
[54] In my respectful view, the Court of Appeal similarly fell into error in describing the essential character of the dispute. Ms. Horrocks, it said, “sever[ed]” her claim relating to discipline and discharge from her claim relating to discrimination:
The essential character of the dispute raised in the complaint to the Commission must be examined in light of the factual context, particularly the absence of a grievance of the second termination. This was not a case of forum shopping. Rather than hedging her bets, by not grieving her second termination, the complainant made a choice to sever her claims relating to discipline and discharge from her claim relating to discrimination on the basis of alcohol dependency. By doing so, she abandoned her rights under the collective agreement to just cause protection, the grievance procedure and union representation (see Paterno v. Salvation Army, Centre of Hope, 2011 HRTO 2298 (Ont. Human Rights Trib.), at para. 33). She also gave up any right to challenge the second termination in terms of her discipline and dismissal, given that in Manitoba only a labour arbitrator can decide issues of whether there was just cause to dismiss an employee who was subject to a collective agreement. [para. 80]
This reveals a misunderstanding of what constitutes the “factual context” of a claim. The relevant facts are only those leading to the dispute. The procedures chosen by a claimant to resolve the dispute have no relevance. Much like the analysis of the adjudicator, the Court of Appeal’s understanding would allow a claimant to circumvent the arbitrator’s exclusive jurisdiction by opting to proceed in a different forum.
[55] The Court of Appeal also found that Ms. Horrocks’ complaint “transcends” the collective agreement and is, therefore, “not in the exclusive jurisdiction of a labour arbitrator to decide” (para. 85). It explained:
. . . the expected standards of accommodating workers with an alcohol or drug dependence should not depend on the nature of a particular collective agreement or the prudence of a particular employer where a workplace is not subject to a collective agreement. A degree of consistency in methodology in designing individualized accommodation for disabled workers is in the overall public interest. These are issues in which the Commission properly plays an important role in defining. [para. 85]
Again, this stands in opposition to Weber. There, the Court (at para. 60) rejected the suggestion that claims involving important policy questions fall outside the arbitrator’s exclusive jurisdiction, stating that, even where a Charter issue may raise “broad policy concerns”, it is “nonetheless a component of the labour dispute, and hence within the jurisdiction of the labour arbitrator”. Continuing, the Court removed all room for doubt on this point: “The existence of broad policy concerns with respect to a given issue cannot preclude the labour arbitrator from deciding all facets of the labour dispute” (ibid.). In short, such concerns do not “transcend” the collective agreement; rather, they form part of the arbitrator’s remit in adjudicating disputes thereunder.
IV. The Possibility of the Commission Declining Jurisdiction
[56] The suggestion is made that, “[a]s a general rule, the Commission should decline jurisdiction unless labour arbitration is not a realistic alternative” (Karakatsanis J.’s reasons, at para. 128). Experience suggests that this statement would prove to be more aspirational than directional. “[D]espite the Weber line of cases and despite the authority of [labour] arbitrators to apply human rights . . . statutes” (Pickel, at p. 199), human rights tribunals have not only regularly held that they have concurrent jurisdiction, but have exercised it, even where there exists or has existed a parallel labour arbitration proceeding dealing with the substance of the complaint (pp. 187‑200).
[57] This posture was evident in the submissions before us from counsel for the Commission who, upon being questioned from the bench about whether the Commission’s position was that “whether or not the Commission chooses to act upon its authority or declines to do so depends on whether the complaint has been ‘fully and fairly’ . . . dealt with under the grievance procedure” (transcript, at p. 85), responded:
No, Justice, and I don’t think the Commission would suggest for a moment that that is what it is there for.
The words I meant to convey is, there is an opportunity on the part of the Executive Director under section 26, or the Commission itself under section 29, to look at whether any given complaint –– and perhaps better words would have been “adjudicated”, “adequately adjudicated”, “fairly adjudicated” would fall into the equation as well. I mean, if there were abuses there, yes, I submit it would be open to the Commission to consider that. [pp. 85‑86]
[58] Leaving room for the Commission to exercise jurisdiction where it subjectively views labour arbitration as not “realistic” (Karakatsanis J.’s reasons, at para. 128), coupled with the Commission’s understanding that it may review the parallel process for “adequacy” or “fairness”, will inevitably come at the expense of finality and judicial economy. Further, and as I have explained, it is an option foreclosed by the jurisprudence of this Court, as I understand it.
V. Conclusion
[59] I would allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and, subject to one caveat I add below, reinstate Edmond J.’s order setting aside the adjudicator’s decision. As Ms. Horrocks neither participated in the judicial review or appeal proceedings in the courts below nor opposed the NRHA’s application for leave to appeal to this Court, I would not make an order as to costs against her. The NRHA will have its costs from the Commission in this Court and in the courts below.
[60] The caveat arises from para. 2 of Edmond J.’s order, which states that Ms. Horrocks “shall be entitled to file a grievance . . . and that if the grievance is not resolved, to proceed to arbitration” (A.R., vol. I, at p. 76). This order appears to reflect the judge’s finding that the NRHA is not entitled to object to Ms. Horrocks’ grievance on the basis of timeliness because it had advised the court that it would not do so (see MBQB reasons, at paras. 62 and 65(8)). I note that counsel for the NRHA made similar representations before this Court.
[61] In my view, Ms. Horrocks’ entitlement to file a grievance and proceed to arbitration was not before the Court of Queen’s Bench on the judicial review. Nor was the NRHA’s ability to object to her grievance on the basis of timeliness. Both issues involve the interpretation and application of the collective agreement, and must therefore be decided in the first instance by the labour arbitrator. I would not restore para. 2 of Edmond J.’s order.
The following are the reasons delivered by
Karakatsanis J. —
I. Overview
[62] What forum is available in Manitoba for adjudicating the workplace human rights claim of a unionized employee — does an arbitrator appointed under The Labour Relations Act, C.C.S.M., c. L10, have exclusive jurisdiction? Or does a labour arbitrator have concurrent jurisdiction with an adjudicator appointed under The Human Rights Code, C.C.S.M., c. H175? That is the issue in this appeal.
[63] My colleague Brown J. concludes that a labour arbitrator has exclusive jurisdiction over Ms. Horrocks’ discrimination claim. He interprets this Court’s jurisprudence as providing a rule that “where labour legislation provides for the final settlement of disputes arising from a collective agreement, the jurisdiction of the decision‑maker empowered by that legislation — generally, a labour arbitrator — is exclusive” (para. 5). As this is the rule, “[c]ompeting statutory tribunals may carve into that sphere of exclusivity, but only where that legislative intent is clearly expressed” (ibid.). My colleague concludes that the jurisdiction of the Manitoba Human Rights Commission (Commission) is ousted in favour of exclusive labour arbitration because he finds that: (i) there is no express legislative intent conferring concurrent jurisdiction on the Commission (at paras. 45‑46); and (ii) the essential nature of Ms. Horrocks’ claim arises under the collective agreement (para. 47).
[64] While I agree that Ms. Horrocks’ discrimination claim arises under the collective agreement and a labour arbitrator accordingly has jurisdiction over it, I disagree that the Commission’s jurisdiction is therefore ousted. There is no rule that the exclusive jurisdiction model from Weber v. Ontario Hydro, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 929, applies in all cases involving a jurisdictional issue between labour arbitration and another statutory tribunal. Such a rule was squarely rejected by the majority in Quebec (Commission des droits de la personne et des droits de la jeunesse) v. Quebec (Attorney General), 2004 SCC 39, [2004] 2 S.C.R. 185 (Morin), where McLachlin C.J. recognized that there cannot be any jurisprudentially created presumption about legislative intent. Even when a dispute arises under a collective agreement, a human rights tribunal may nevertheless have concurrent jurisdiction over the dispute depending on the legislation.
[65] I proceed in three parts. First, I explain my view of this Court’s jurisprudence. Second, I explain why the statutory schemes point to concurrent jurisdiction in this case. Third, I describe the factors the Commission or the human rights adjudicator in this case could have considered in determining whether to exercise their discretion to defer to labour arbitration. Although labour arbitration may well have been the more appropriate forum for Ms. Horrocks’ claim, I do not find that the adjudicator was wrong to conclude that she had jurisdiction and to rule on the merits of the complaint (2015 MBHR 3, 83 C.H.R.R. D/45). In these circumstances, I would not remit the substantive discrimination claim to a labour arbitrator nearly a decade after the events giving rise to it and over six years after the adjudicator’s decision on the merits. I would accordingly dismiss the appeal.
II. Analysis
A. This Court’s Jurisprudence
[66] My colleague interprets the decisions in Weber, Regina Police Assn. Inc. v. Regina (City) Board of Police Commissioners, 2000 SCC 14, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 360, Parry Sound (District) Social Services Administration Board v. O.P.S.E.U., Local 324, 2003 SCC 42, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 157, and Morin as having effectively decided this appeal. He writes that these “cases indicate that, where labour legislation provides for the final settlement of disputes arising from a collective agreement, the jurisdiction of the arbitrator or other decision‑maker empowered by this legislation is exclusive. This applies irrespective of the nature of the competing forum, but is always subject to clearly expressed legislative intent to the contrary” (para. 15).
[67] I disagree. Below, I explain why these cases do not provide a rule that, absent express legislative intent to the contrary, arbitral jurisdiction is exclusive over disputes that fall within the scope of the collective agreement.
[68] In Weber, this Court considered the jurisdictional divide between labour arbitration and the superior courts. It held that the Ontario Labour Relations Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.2, ousted a superior court’s jurisdiction to hear the claimant’s tort and constitutional claims, thus concluding that labour arbitration was the only forum, as between labour arbitration and the courts, for adjudicating disputes arising under the collective agreement. The Court in Weber provided a framework for resolving jurisdictional issues between labour arbitration and the courts, which was refined in Regina Police Assn., Quebec (Attorney General) v. Quebec (Human Rights Tribunal), 2004 SCC 40, [2004] 2 S.C.R. 223 (Charette), and Morin to apply to jurisdictional issues between two statutory tribunals.
[69] Those cases set out the appropriate approach to the analysis. The first step is to consider both statutory schemes to determine whether the legislature intended for exclusive or concurrent jurisdiction over certain spheres: “Jurisdictional issues must be decided in accordance with the legislative scheme governing the parties” (Charette, at para. 33; see also Weber, at paras. 38-58, and Morin, at para. 15). In conducting this exercise, “a liberal interpretation of the legislation is required to ensure that a scheme is not offended by the conferral of jurisdiction on a forum not intended by the legislature” (Regina Police Assn., at para. 39), or by ousting the jurisdiction of a forum intended by the legislature.
[70] The second step is to consider the essential character of the dispute to determine whether it falls within one or both of those statutory schemes (Morin, at paras. 15 and 20; Regina Police Assn., at para. 27). As McLachlin C.J. stated in Morin, at para. 15: “The second step is logically necessary since the question is whether the legislative mandate applies to the particular dispute at issue.” This inquiry turns on the facts of the dispute rather than the legal characterization of the claim (Weber, at paras. 43-45). The analysis “must . . . take into account all the facts surrounding the dispute between the parties” (Bisaillon v. Concordia University, 2006 SCC 19, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 666, at para. 31; see also Regina Police Assn., at para. 25). When the statutory schemes provide for concurrent jurisdiction, the essential character of the dispute may fall within both.
[71] I agree with my colleague, at para. 41, that “[w]here two tribunals have concurrent jurisdiction over a dispute, the decision‑maker must consider whether to exercise its jurisdiction in the circumstances of a particular case.” In other words, the decision‑maker must consider which tribunal is the “better fit” (Morin, at para. 30). As I find that there is concurrent jurisdiction here, I expand on the factors that should guide the determination of the more appropriate forum below.
[72] Apart from establishing the framework, the cases do not provide a rebuttable rule that the exclusive jurisdiction model, followed in Weber, applies in every case involving two statutory tribunals. In Weber, the exclusive jurisdiction model respected the legislature’s intent to create a specialized forum for certain disputes: “. . . it would offend the legislative scheme to permit the parties to a collective agreement, or the employees on whose behalf it was negotiated, to have recourse to the ordinary courts which are in the circumstances a duplicative forum to which the legislature has not assigned these tasks” (Weber, at para. 41, quoting St. Anne Nackawic Pulp & Paper Co. v. Canadian Paper Workers Union, Local 219, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 704, at pp. 718-19 (emphasis added)). Exclusive jurisdiction also promoted efficiency — i.e., permitting court actions to proceed whenever framing a cause of action as independent of the collective agreement would undermine the quick and economical resolution of disputes (Weber, at para. 46).
[73] Statutory tribunals are established by legislatures to carry out certain statutory mandates. They are given specialized jurisdiction and “assigned . . . tasks” for efficiency, access to justice, or other reasons (St. Anne Nackawic, at p. 719; see also J.‑A. Pickel, “Statutory Tribunals and the Challenges of Managing Parallel Claims”, in E. Shilton and K. Schucher, eds., One Law for All? Weber v Ontario Hydro and Canadian Labour Law: Essays in Memory of Bernie Adell (2017), 175, at p. 178). When statutory tribunals are established, courts should give way to this special grant of jurisdiction so as not to undermine the benefits intended by the legislature — one such benefit is the provision of speedy and affordable dispute resolution with “a minimum of disruption to the parties and the economy” (Weber, at para. 46). While courts of course retain residual jurisdiction to hear matters not conferred on other bodies (Regina Police Assn., at para. 26), statutory tribunals require jurisdictional space, so to speak, to do their jobs.
[74] This reasoning from Weber favouring exclusive labour arbitration over civil litigation in the courts does not readily apply to jurisdictional issues between different statutory tribunals. Statutory tribunals are “set up at different times, as part of different policy initiatives which themselves overlap” (A. K. Lokan and M. Yachnin, “From Weber to Parry Sound: The Expanded Scope of Arbitration” (2004), 11 C.L.E.L.J. 1, at p. 27). When two tribunals are created with overlapping mandates and areas of expertise, the legislative schemes must be viewed as a whole. The legislature may very well have “assigned” the same “tasks” to two forums. While “the rationale for adopting the exclusive jurisdiction model [is] to ensure that the legislative scheme in issue [is] not frustrated by the conferral of jurisdiction upon an adjudicative body that was not intended by the legislature” (Regina Police Assn., at para. 26 (emphasis added)), the legislature may have intended for more than one adjudicative body to have jurisdiction over a dispute.
[75] Indeed, legislatures sometimes expressly recognize that statutory tribunals have overlapping jurisdiction. The human rights statutes in Ontario and certain other jurisdictions, for example, explicitly allow the relevant statutory bodies to decline to deal with complaints in appropriate circumstances, including if the complaint could be more appropriately dealt with in a different forum (see Human Rights Code, R.S.O. 1990, c. H.19, s. 45.1; B. Etherington, “Weber, and Almost Everything After, Twenty Years Later: Its Impact on Individual Charter, Common Law, and Statutory Rights Claims”, in Shilton and Schucher, One Law for All?, 25, at p. 77; Human Rights Code, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 210, s. 25; Canadian Human Rights Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6 (CHRA), s. 41).
[76] In Regina Police Assn., the Court considered a jurisdictional issue between two statutory regimes: labour arbitration and police boards created under The Police Act, 1990, S.S. 1990‑91, c. P‑15.01. Interpreting The Police Act “liberally” (para. 36), the Court concluded that the Act set out a complete code for disciplinary matters involving police officers and that the essential character of the dispute in that case fell within its statutory scheme. On the other hand, the collective agreement specifically provided that matters falling within the Act and regulations were not arbitrable (para. 27). It was clear from this scheme that concurrent jurisdiction was not contemplated: “The question, therefore, is whether the legislature intended this dispute to be governed by the collective agreement or The Police Act and Regulations” (para. 26 (emphasis added)).
[77] Thus, to the extent the Court in Regina Police Assn. explained that “the approach described in Weber applies when it is necessary to decide which of the two competing statutory regimes should govern a dispute” (para. 26), it did so in the context of competing, not concurrent jurisdiction. In those circumstances, it was necessary to determine within whose exclusive jurisdiction the essential nature of the dispute fell. I therefore disagree with my colleague’s reading of Regina Police Assn., which suggests that the Court affirmed that matters falling within the ambit of a collective agreement fall exclusively within the jurisdiction of a labour arbitrator.
[78] Similarly, the decision in Morin does not prescribe a rule that all disputes arising under a collective agreement fall exclusively within a labour arbitrator’s jurisdiction even when another statutory tribunal is in play. Morin concerned a collective agreement covering teachers in Quebec. A group of young teachers challenged amendments to the agreement’s seniority credit scheme, for discriminating against them on the basis of age, contrary to the Quebec Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms, R.S.Q., c. C-12. The issue was whether their discrimination claim, which they took to the Quebec Human Rights Commission and which was later brought to the Quebec Human Rights Tribunal, instead fell within the exclusive jurisdiction of a labour arbitrator.
[79] McLachlin C.J. clarified that, in resolving the issue, the first step is to look at the legislative scheme respecting labour arbitration and the other statutory tribunal to determine whether the legislature intended to confer areas of exclusive jurisdiction to either forum (paras. 16-19).
[80] Under the first step, s. 100 of the Labour Code, R.S.Q., c. C-27, required that “[e]very grievance shall be submitted to arbitration in the manner provided in the collective agreement if it so provides and the certified association and the employer abide by it.” This meant that a labour arbitrator was competent to resolve all grievances under the collective agreement (Morin, at para. 16). In the Quebec Charter, s. 111 granted the Human Rights Tribunal broad jurisdiction over human rights matters in Quebec. That jurisdiction was not exclusive because some provisions of the Quebec Charter removed the Human Rights Tribunal’s jurisdiction in certain situations or gave the Commission discretion to stop acting on behalf of a complainant (paras. 18-19).
[81] While McLachlin C.J. observed that s. 100 of the Labour Code was similar to the clause examined in Weber and that, in Weber, the Court gave the arbitrator exclusive jurisdiction over disputes arising under the collective agreement, she noted that the language was arguably weaker in the Quebec legislation (para. 21). In the end, however, she did not conclusively decide whether s. 100 conferred exclusive jurisdiction on a labour arbitrator for disputes arising under the collective agreement because, in any event, the nature of the dispute was outside of any potential area of exclusivity: “This clause [at issue in Weber] is arguably stronger than the clause conferring jurisdiction on the arbitrator in the case at bar. However, the critical difference between Weber and this case lies in the factual context that gave rise to the dispute” (para. 21). In other words, Morin turned on the second step of the test: the nature of the dispute was such that it would not have fallen within the exclusive jurisdiction of a labour arbitrator even if the scheme provided for exclusive jurisdiction.
[82] I therefore agree with Brown J. that, ultimately, McLachlin C.J. held in Morin that the arbitrator did not have exclusive jurisdiction over the young teachers’ dispute because of the dispute’s nature — the claim was more about “the process of the negotiation and the inclusion of [the impugned] term in the collective agreement” rather than a violation of the collective agreement (para. 23; see also para. 24). There was agreement among the parties on how the provisions, if valid, applied, and the young teachers’ dispute did not therefore “arise out of the operation of the collective agreement, so much as out of the pre-contractual negotiation of that agreement” (para. 24).
[83] I do not agree, however, that Morin decided that the labour arbitrator’s jurisdiction would have been exclusive had the nature of the young teachers’ dispute fallen within the collective agreement’s ambit. That is precisely the question McLachlin C.J. left undecided.
[84] Moreover, McLachlin C.J.’s analysis in Morin is consistent with the proposition that falling under a labour arbitrator’s jurisdiction is insufficient to ground arbitral exclusivity in all cases. McLachlin C.J. went on to provide four distinct reasons to refute the argument that the Tribunal “should not have taken jurisdiction” over the young teachers’ dispute: (1) the claim was about the collective agreement itself rather than a violation of it; (2) the union involved was opposed in interest to the complainants so they could have been left without legal recourse; (3) the labour arbitrator would not have jurisdiction over every party possibly affected by the dispute; and (4) the Tribunal was a “better fit” to challenge the collective agreement (Morin, at para. 27 (emphasis added); see also paras. 28-30, citing Ford Motor Co. of Canada Ltd. v. Ontario (Human Rights Commission) (2001), 209 D.L.R. (4th) 465 (Ont. C.A.) (Naraine); Etherington, at p. 74).
[85] As I will explain below, these factors provide useful guidance to human rights tribunals on when to exercise jurisdiction or when to defer in favor of labour arbitration.
[86] For these reasons, I do not accept that Morin mandates a particular result in this appeal. McLachlin C.J.’s analysis in Morin was limited to deciding that arbitral jurisdiction was not exclusive in the circumstances of that case. She did not decide whether it would have been exclusive had the dispute arisen under the collective agreement. Her reasons can also be taken as implying that a labour arbitrator could have had jurisdiction over a similar dispute (see para. 25).
[87] Importantly, this Court’s jurisprudence does not establish a judicially created presumption for interpreting arbitration clauses in legislation. In Morin, McLachlin C.J. was careful not to provide concrete rules, emphasizing how much each case depends on the legislative scheme. She also expressly rejected the dissenting opinion’s suggestion that the starting point is arbitral exclusivity (at paras. 11 and 14):
Weber holds that the model that applies in a given situation depends on the governing legislation, as applied to the dispute viewed in its factual matrix. . . . However, Weber does not stand for the proposition that labour arbitrators always have exclusive jurisdiction in employer-union disputes. Depending on the legislation and the nature of the dispute, other tribunals may possess overlapping jurisdiction, concurrent jurisdiction, or themselves be endowed with exclusive jurisdiction . . . .
. . .
The case thus turns on whether the legislation confers exclusive jurisdiction on the arbitrator over this dispute. At this point, I diverge, with respect, from my colleague Bastarache J. who starts from the assumption that there is an “established principle” of arbitral exclusivity in Quebec. He formulates the principal question as whether “the principle of exclusive arbitral jurisdiction, a well‑established principle in Quebec law, [should] be abandoned in favour of the jurisdiction of the Human Rights Tribunal in cases where a dispute between unionized workers and their employer raises a human rights issue” (para. 32). Thus framed, the question presupposes exclusivity. But, as we have seen, there is no legal presumption of exclusivity in abstracto. [Text in brackets in original.]
[88] McLachlin C.J. recognized that legislation across different jurisdictions will differ and this Court cannot presume, on the basis of previous decisions like Regina Police Assn. decided in different contexts, that the legislature will use express language to indicate concurrent jurisdiction. If anything, even though Regina Police Assn. did not involve a human rights claim, the Court interpreted The Police Act “liberally” when labour arbitration was the competing forum. My colleague’s suggestion that mandatory arbitration clauses should be presumed to confer exclusive jurisdiction will have problematic implications for other contexts where labour arbitration has overlapping or concurrent jurisdiction with other statutory bodies (see, e.g., Greater Essex District School Board and OSSTF (OMERS Pension Plan), Re (2015), 256 L.A.C. (4th) 1 (Ont.)).
[89] For the same reasons, the ruling of this Court in Parry Sound — which held that human rights codes are substantively incorporated in all collective agreements — also does not provide an answer to the jurisdictional issue in this appeal (see also Lokan and Yachnin, at p. 27). A human rights complaint from a unionized employee, even if it falls within the ambit of the collective agreement, does not automatically entail exclusive arbitral jurisdiction. Indeed, “[i]n the years since Morin was decided, concurrency has clearly been accepted across Canada as the general approach to be followed in dealing with human rights issues” (Etherington, at p. 76; see also C. Mummé, “Questions, Questions: Has Weber Had an Impact on Unions’ Representational Responsibilities in Workplace Human Rights Disputes?”, in Shilton and Schucher, One Law for All?, 229, at p. 235). Most Canadian jurisdictions have thus interpreted Morin in a manner consistent with the analysis offered in these reasons (Pickel, at p. 176). Appellate courts have generally ruled in favor of concurrent jurisdiction between an arbitrator and another statutory tribunal (see Human Rights Commission (N.S.) v. Halifax (Regional Municipality), 2008 NSCA 21, 264 N.S.R. (2d) 61, at para. 44; Naraine; Calgary Health Region v. Alberta (Human Rights & Citizenship Commission), 2007 ABCA 120, 74 Alta. L.R. (4th) 23, at paras. 25 and 34; J. D. Gagnon, “Les droits de la personne dans un contexte de rapports collectifs de travail. Compétence de l’arbitre et d’autres tribunaux. Quand l’incertitude devient la règle” (2006), 66 R. du B. 1, at p. 31; contra, Université de Sherbrooke v. Commission des droits de la personne et des droits de la jeunesse, 2015 QCCA 1397, at para. 27 (CanLII)).
[90] To conclude, the jurisprudence does not provide a rule of arbitral exclusivity when another statutory regime is in issue. There is no presumption of exclusivity when a legislature uses a mandatory arbitration clause such that concurrent jurisdiction can only be found if there is express language to that effect. I now turn to the statutory schemes in this case.
B. The Statutory Schemes
[91] Since the jurisdiction of two specialized tribunals is at issue, I consider the legislative regime in both the Manitoba Labour Relations Act and the Manitoba Human Rights Code: “. . . there are two, not one, legislative mandates that must be respected” (Calgary Health Region, at para. 25; see also Regina Police Assn., at para. 23).
[92] First, the Manitoba Labour Relations Act requires that every collective agreement contain a method for the settlement of all differences between the parties (the union and the employer) concerning the meaning, application, or alleged violation of the collective agreement:
78(1) Every collective agreement shall contain a provision for final settlement without stoppage of work, by arbitration or otherwise, of all differences between the parties thereto, or persons bound by the agreement or on whose behalf it was entered into, concerning its meaning, application, or alleged violation.
[93] If the parties fail to include a provision as required under s. 78(1), the collective agreement is deemed to contain a clause providing for arbitration after the exhaustion of any grievance procedure established in the collective agreement (s. 78(2)).
[94] The Act also grants labour arbitrators broad remedial powers. They can order damages for contraventions of the collective agreement with interest (s. 121(2)(a) and (b)), order the reinstatement of an employee (s. 121(2)(c)), order an employer to rescind or rectify disciplinary action taken against an employee (s. 121(2)(d)), “relieve, on just and equitable terms, against breaches of time limits or other procedural requirements set out in the collective agreement” (s. 121(2)(e)), or do two or more of these things (s. 121(2)(f)). The arbitrator’s ruling is also described as “a final and conclusive settlement of the matter” (s. 121(2)).
[95] There is thus broad arbitral jurisdiction to deal with matters related to the collective agreement. However, the Labour Relations Act does not specifically oust the Commission’s jurisdiction under the Human Rights Code.
[96] Turning to the Code, the preamble provides that “Manitobans recognize the individual worth and dignity of every member of the human family” and that the human rights protections enshrined in the Code are “of such fundamental importance that they merit paramount status over all other laws of the province”. Under s. 4, the Commission has several key responsibilities, including to:
(a) promote the principle that all members of the human family are free and equal in dignity and rights and entitled to be treated on the basis of their personal merits, regardless of their actual or presumed association with any group;
(b) further the principle of equality of opportunity and equality in the exercise of civil and legal rights regardless of status;
. . .
(e) promote understanding and acceptance of, and compliance with, this Code and the regulations.
[97] Section 22(1) provides that “[a]ny person may file, at an office of the Commission, a complaint alleging that another person has contravened this Code.” Once a complaint is filed, s. 26 requires that “[a]s soon as is reasonably possible . . ., the executive director shall cause the complaint to be investigated to the extent the Commission regards as sufficient for fairly and properly disposing of it”.
[98] Section 34 of the Code identifies the parties to a complaint referred for adjudication. The Commission is one of the parties, and “shall have carriage of the complaint”. Section 29(3) requires the Commission to request that an adjudicator be designated to adjudicate a complaint if the Commission is satisfied that additional proceedings would further the objectives of the Code or if it would assist the Commission in discharging its responsibilities.
[99] For violations of the Code, adjudicators have broad remedial powers. They can make a party do or refrain from doing anything to secure compliance with the Code, order compensation, order damages, or adopt and implement affirmative action programs (see s. 43(2)). Finally, s. 42 provides that adjudicators have exclusive jurisdiction over any questions “that must be decided in completing the adjudication and in rendering a final decision respecting the complaint”, and s. 58 provides that the substantive rights and obligations in the Human Rights Code are “paramount”.
[100] Nothing in the Human Rights Code ousts the Commission’s jurisdiction over a unionized employee. Nor does it oust the jurisdiction of the arbitrator under the Labour Relations Act.
[101] I turn next to consider the essential nature of Ms. Horrocks’ dispute to determine whether it falls within one or both of these jurisdictions. Ms. Horrocks’ claim is about whether her employer discriminated against her on the basis of mental or physical disability — and therefore violated the collective agreement and the Human Rights Code — when it terminated her employment for allegedly violating her undertaking to totally abstain from alcohol. She seeks reinstatement.
[102] I agree with Brown J. that the essential nature of Ms. Horrocks’ claim falls within the scope of the collective agreement. The collective agreement in this case specifically prohibits the employer from discriminating on the basis of mental or physical disability (“Collective Agreement between: Canadian Union of Public Employees, Local 8600 and Nor-Man Regional Health Authority Inc.”, April 1, 2008, to March 31, 2012, art. 6, reproduced in A.R., vol. II, at p. 12). In Parry Sound, this Court confirmed that the substantive rights and obligations of human rights codes are incorporated into each collective agreement over which an arbitrator has jurisdiction. The collective agreement in the present case also provides a grievance and arbitration procedure for any dispute arising out of the interpretation, application, or alleged violation of the collective agreement (arts. 10 and 11). Given this context, Ms. Horrocks’ discrimination claim can easily be characterized as arising out of an alleged violation of the collective agreement. A labour arbitrator accordingly has jurisdiction over it.
[103] In my view, however, the dispute also falls within the Commission’s jurisdiction even though Ms. Horrocks is a unionized employee. Her complaint of discrimination falls squarely within the mandate of the Code. Section 22(1) expressly provides that “[a]ny person” can file a complaint with the Commission. The processing of her complaint is also within the Commission’s mandate under ss. 4, 7(2)(a), 29(3) and 34 of the Code. Once a complaint is made to the Commission, it must be dealt with in accordance with the Code. There is no exception for a complaint made by a unionized employee who may be subject to a collective agreement.
[104] Although the Court of Appeal in this case concluded that the human rights adjudicator had jurisdiction over Ms. Horrocks’ dispute, it also held that the adjudicator lacked jurisdiction to decide “questions of discipline or dismissal or to grant any related remedy” (2017 MBCA 98, 416 D.L.R. (4th) 385, at para. 92). I disagree with this bifurcated conclusion. Section 43(2) of the Code gives adjudicators broad powers to remedy human rights violations, including ordering an employer to “do or refrain from doing anything in order to secure compliance with this Code, to rectify any circumstance caused by the contravention, or to make just amends for the contravention”. If a dispute falls within the adjudicator’s jurisdiction, then the adjudicator’s remedial powers are delimited by the Code.
[105] Given the mandate and provisions of the Code, including s. 22(1)’s use of “[a]ny person”, I find it unacceptable that some unionized employees, whose unions refuse to grieve their members’ discrimination claims without breaching the duty of fair representation, would be left without legal recourse. Nothing in the Code suggests that this result was intended; on the contrary, such a result might violate the responsibilities of the Commission under s. 4.
[106] Although it is true that the duty of fair representation “acts as a check on the principle of exclusivity”, it is not a sufficient check given the importance of the human rights involved (Mummé, at p. 237). Despite the tendency of labour arbitrators to interpret the duty in an expansive way where discrimination is involved, the content of the duty has not evolved since this Court’s decision in Gendron v. Supply and Services Union of the Public Service Alliance of Canada, Local 50057, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1298, which preceded Parry Sound:
In a situation of conflicting employee interests, the union may pursue one set of interests to the detriment of another as long as its decision to do so is not actuated by any . . . improper motives . . ., and as long as it turns its mind to all the relevant considerations. . . . [I]t is the underlying motivation and method used to make this choice that may be objectionable. [pp. 1328-29]
Thus, in cases involving discrimination against a unionized employee, unions can decide not to grieve without breaching their duty of fair representation, “so long as their decisions are reasoned, not arbitrary, in bad faith or discriminatory” (Mummé, at p. 238; see also Mason v. Gen-Auto Shippers and Teamsters Local Union 938, [1999] OLRB Rep. 242, at paras. 17 and 20; Creed v. International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local Union 339, [1999] O.L.R.D. No. 3422 (QL)). They have the right to make errors, and they must also, at times, balance competing interests.
[107] To conclude, I find that both a labour arbitrator under the Labour Relations Act and the Commission under the Human Rights Code have jurisdiction, on the face of the legislation, over Ms. Horrocks’ claim of discrimination against her employer. Nothing in either scheme suggests the legislature meant either scheme to prevail. There is no doubt that the labour scheme is designed to rely heavily upon arbitration for matters within the scope of the collective agreement. But so too does the human rights scheme rely heavily upon the Commission and human rights adjudicators to address discrimination, given the paramount and fundamental importance of human rights legislation (Tranchemontagne v. Ontario (Director, Disability Support Program), 2006 SCC 14, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 513, at para. 33).
[108] This Court has only ousted the jurisdiction of human rights tribunals when the statutory text of the other tribunal has specifically excluded all other decision-making bodies, thereby indicating that jurisdiction was meant to be exclusive. In Charette, the Court considered a jurisdictional issue between the Quebec Human Rights Tribunal and the Commission des affaires sociales, Quebec’s social assistance review board (CAS). The complainant participated in a social assistance program for low-income families with children. The program required that at least one adult receive income from employment. When the complainant went on maternity leave, she lost access to the program because maternity benefits were not considered income from employment. She filed a claim with the Human Rights Tribunal alleging discrimination on the basis of sex and pregnancy contrary to the Quebec Charter. The Quebec government contested the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, arguing that the CAS had exclusive jurisdiction.
[109] A majority of the Court concluded that the CAS had exclusive jurisdiction to hear the matter. Section 23 of the Act respecting the Commission des affaires sociales, R.S.Q., c. C-34, gave the CAS authority to interpret and apply the Quebec Charter. Section 21 provided that the administrative appeal route for dissatisfied claimants was not overlapping or concurrent with courts or other tribunals, but was exclusive to the CAS:
The object of the [CAS] is to hear, to the exclusion of every other commission, tribunal, board or body, except as regards the requests contemplated in paragraph d of this section:
(a) the appeals brought under section 78 or section 81 of the Act respecting income security . . . .
[110] Similarly, in Canada (House of Commons) v. Vaid, 2005 SCC 30, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 667, the Court again addressed a contest between a human rights tribunal and a labour arbitrator. Mr. Vaid worked at the House of Commons and alleged that he had been constructively dismissed. He brought a complaint before the Canada Human Rights Tribunal alleging racial discrimination contrary to the CHRA. As a federal employee, Mr. Vaid’s employment was governed by the Parliamentary Employment and Staff Relations Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 33 (2nd Supp.) (PESRA), which had a labour arbitration regime. One of the issues was whether Mr. Vaid’s complaint fell exclusively within PESRA’s labour arbitration regime or whether the Tribunal had concurrent jurisdiction over it.
[111] The Court unanimously held that Mr. Vaid’s complaint fell exclusively within PESRA’s labour arbitration regime. Section 5(1) provided that one of PESRA’s purposes was to “provide to certain persons employed in Parliamentary service collective bargaining and other rights in respect of their employment”. Section 62(1)(a)(i) permitted any employee who felt aggrieved by the interpretation or application of “a provision of a statute” to present a grievance. Finally, s. 2 of PESRA provided that, where other federal legislation dealt with “matters similar to those provided for under” PESRA, PESRA prevailed:
. . . except as provided in this Act, nothing in any other Act of Parliament that provides for matters similar to those provided for under this Act . . . shall apply . . . .
[112] In Charette and Vaid, then, the legislation clearly provided for exclusive jurisdiction of a body that was not the human rights tribunal. If the dispute fell within the jurisdiction of that other body (the CAS and PESRA arbitration regimes, respectively), the legislative intent was to oust the jurisdiction of the human rights tribunal.
[113] No such express or strong language exists in the Manitoba Labour Relations Act. The text of s. 78(1) states that “[e]very collective agreement shall contain a provision for final settlement without stoppage of work, by arbitration or otherwise”. Where the Manitoba legislature intends to oust the jurisdiction of other tribunals, it uses the words “exclusive jurisdiction” (see, e.g., The Manitoba Public Insurance Corporation Act, C.C.S.M., c. P215, s. 65(13); The Workers Compensation Act, C.C.S.M., c. W200, ss. 60(1) and 60.8(1); The Manitoba Hydro Act, C.C.S.M., c. H190, s. 22; and see “exclusive authority” in The Residential Tenancies Act, C.C.S.M., c. R119, ss. 152(1) and 158(1)). Rather than using the words “exclusive jurisdiction”, s. 78(1) of the Act even contemplates the parties specifying a different forum — “or otherwise”. While the words “or otherwise” in s. 78(1) do not necessarily suggest that the Labour Relations Act contemplates concurrent jurisdiction with the Commission, they certainly indicate that the legislature is comfortable with parties bargaining for forums other than labour arbitration to have jurisdiction over disputes arising from a collective agreement.
[114] The conclusion to be drawn is that when the Manitoba legislature intends to confer exclusive jurisdiction, it uses clear words to that effect. The Labour Relations Act does not clearly confer exclusive jurisdiction on labour arbitrators, and the Human Rights Code does not remove from the Commission’s jurisdiction human rights complaints of unionized employees. Neither statute ousts the other’s jurisdiction, and Ms. Horrocks’ claim falls within both a labour arbitrator’s mandate under the Labour Relations Act and the Commission’s mandate under the Human Rights Code. In these circumstances, I would agree with the comments of Lokan and Yachnin, at p. 27:
. . . it is difficult to make a credible case that the legislature intended arbitration to supplant other tribunals completely in the unionized sector. . . . Rather than look for jurisdictional clarity that does not exist, it would seem to be more profitable for tribunals and courts to develop pragmatic doctrines on how to treat each other’s processes and decisions.
[115] I now turn to the remaining issue — whether the Commission or adjudicator should have exercised their jurisdiction to hear the complaint in this case.
C. Which Forum Is More Appropriate?
[116] My conclusion that both a human rights adjudicator and a labour arbitrator have jurisdiction over Ms. Horrocks’ dispute does not answer the question of whether the Commission or adjudicator should have deferred in favour of a different forum. The analysis of whether a forum has jurisdiction is distinct from whether it should exercise that jurisdiction. Dealing with both jurisdiction and forum non conveniens in the private international law context, Côté J. has explained: “The importance of maintaining this distinction flows from the discrete concerns underlying each analysis and the nature of the relevant factors at each stage” (Haaretz.com v. Goldhar, 2018 SCC 28, [2018] 2 S.C.R. 3, at para. 28).
(1) Discretion to Defer
[117] In their submissions, both Ms. Horrocks and the Commission suggested that the Commission may not have discretion under the Human Rights Code to decline to pursue adjudication if a complaint falls within its jurisdiction (transcript, at p. 75). As Ms. Horrocks notes in her factum, however, it might be “reasonable to assume that the Manitoba Human Rights Commission may not be ‘satisfied’ that adjudication is required where a complainant has or could pursue a grievance”, thus allowing for a form of deferral (R.F. Linda Horrocks, at para. 92). The employer argued that, in the event this Court finds jurisdiction to be concurrent, it should decide that arbitration is the most appropriate forum. Failure to give proper guidance would lead to forum shopping and collateral attacks, ultimately undermining the rule of law.
[118] Under s. 29 of the Code, the Commission plays a gatekeeper function in screening complaints:
29(3) If a complaint is not settled, terminated or dismissed and the Commission is satisfied that additional proceedings in respect of the complaint would further the objectives of this Code or assist the Commission in discharging its responsibilities under this Code, the Commission shall
(a) request the chief adjudicator to designate a member of the adjudication panel to adjudicate the complaint; or
(b) recommend that the minister commence a prosecution for an alleged contravention of the Code.
(See also Halifax (Regional Municipality) v. Nova Scotia (Human Rights Commission), 2012 SCC 10, [2012] 1 S.C.R. 364, at para. 21.)
[119] Although s. 29(3) is less explicit than the deferral clauses found in Ontario, British Columbia, and the CHRA (see Ontario’s Human Rights Code, s. 45.1; British Columbia’s Human Rights Code, s. 25(1) and (2); CHRA, s. 41(1)), the provision does not require the Commission to forward a case to an adjudicator unless it is satisfied that it would further the objectives of the Code. The availability of a more appropriate, efficient, and timely forum that addresses workplace discrimination may well satisfy the Commission that additional proceedings before a human rights adjudicator would not assist the Commission in discharging its duties. Further, the Commission may choose to defer any decision in this regard, pending pursuit of other accessible adjudication addressing the complaint of discrimination.
[120] Indeed, this interpretation of the Code accords with the Commission’s practice of deferring the adjudication of complaints in favour of other forums. For example, in a policy statement, the Commission explains that where a dispute falls under the concurrent jurisdiction of another body which is considering the matter, the Commission may seek the consent of the parties to “put the complaint on hold” or do so on its own initiative (Policy # P-3: Jurisdiction — Concurrent Jurisdiction, revised October 8, 2014 (online), at p. 2).
[121] Similarly, the Manitoba Human Rights Tribunal has concluded that it can defer hearing complaints in appropriate circumstances, including so that the dispute can be adjudicated by a labour arbitrator (Blatz v. 4L Communications Inc., 2012 CanLII 42311, at paras. 11-12; Qumsieh v. Brandon School Division, 2019 MBHR 3, at paras. 10-11 (CanLII)).
[122] Different considerations may apply, and a complaint may be dismissed, where there are concerns about a duplication of proceedings (see Code, ss. 29(1)(a) and 42; British Columbia (Workers’ Compensation Board) v. Figliola, 2011 SCC 52, [2011] 3 S.C.R. 422, at paras. 25-34; Zulkoskey v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Social Development), 2016 FCA 268, at paras. 23-24 (CanLII); Dick v. Pepsi Bottling Group (Canada), Co., 2014 CanLII 16055 (Man. H.R.)).
(2) Factors Guiding the Exercise of Discretion
[123] When the Commission shares jurisdiction with a labour arbitrator over a human rights dispute, a number of factors can guide its discretion in deciding whether or not to proceed with a complaint of a unionized employee.
[124] As mentioned, McLachlin C.J. provided four factors in Morin that favoured the human rights forum’s exercise of jurisdiction in that case: (1) the claim was about the collective agreement itself rather than a violation of it; (2) the union involved was opposed in interest to the complainants so they could have been left without legal recourse; (3) the labour arbitrator would not have jurisdiction over every party possibly affected by the dispute; and (4) the Tribunal was a “better fit” to challenge the collective agreement (paras. 27-30).
[125] If the union is adverse in interest or is unwilling to pursue a grievance, this weighs heavily in favour of access to justice in respect of human rights claims (Morin, at para. 28; Naraine, at paras. 60-61; A.T.U., Local 583 v. Calgary (City), 2007 ABCA 121, 75 Alta. L.R. (4th) 75, at paras. 64-66). Where a union declines to grieve the human rights complaint of a unionized employee, unionized employees should have legal recourse to adjudicate their human rights complaints.
[126] Conversely, if the claim is about the violation of the collective agreement, the union is supportive, the arbitrator has jurisdiction over the necessary parties, and the remedy seeks re-establishment of the employment relationship, there will be a compelling case for the human rights forum to defer to the labour arbitration regime.
[127] Finally, determining which forum is a “better fit” permits a broad consideration of the circumstances of the complaint. It seems to me that the remedy sought by the complainant may be highly relevant to the better fit analysis. For example, if a complainant seeks reinstatement, labour arbitration through union representation may be the better fit. On the other hand, if a complainant seeks a declaration, damages, or systemic changes — rather than the re-establishment of the employment relationship — a human rights tribunal may be the better fit.
[128] Thus, there is a strong case for labour arbitration to have primary responsibility over the human rights complaints of unionized employees, particularly if the remedy sought is reinstatement. Access to justice and efficiency in resolving issues in an ongoing relationship will militate in favour of deferring to labour arbitration. As a general rule, the Commission should decline jurisdiction unless labour arbitration is not a realistic alternative.
[129] In this case, the human rights adjudicator was not presented with any evidence that other proceedings had been or could be commenced; the limited evidence she had suggested that Ms. Horrocks did not feel confident that the union would support her (para. 87). Nevertheless, there was no clear evidence that the union would not assist. And there are good reasons why the Commission or the adjudicator could have exercised their discretion to defer to the labour arbitration scheme. The dispute was about discrimination arising under the collective agreement, and the remedy sought, reinstatement, was squarely within the powers of a labour arbitrator and concerned the re-establishment of the working relationship.
[130] With that said, it has always been recognized that remedies in judicial review are discretionary in nature, such that “even if the applicant makes out a case for review on the merits, the reviewing court has an overriding discretion to refuse relief” (Strickland v. Canada (Attorney General), 2015 SCC 37, [2015] 2 S.C.R. 713, at para. 37; see also Canada (Citizenship and Immigration) v. Khosa, 2009 SCC 12, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 339, at para. 36). The discretionary nature of the remedies available in a judicial review reflects an orientation not only towards individual rights but also towards the public interest in the orderly administration of affairs, including the need for finality and certainty (Fingland v. Ontario (Ministry of Transportation), 2008 ONCA 812, 93 O.R. (3d) 268, at para. 30, quoting Chippewas of Sarnia Band v. Canada (Attorney General) (2000), 51 O.R. (3d) 641 (C.A.), at para. 258; D. J. M. Brown and J. M. Evans, with the assistance of D. Fairlie, Judicial Review of Administrative Action in Canada (loose-leaf), at § 3:1). The human rights adjudicator in this case was asked to decide whether or not she had jurisdiction, which she answered affirmatively. Because she clearly had jurisdiction to hear the case, I cannot conclude that the adjudicator was wrong to proceed in these circumstances. In any event, it would not be appropriate, nearly a decade after the events giving rise to the dispute and over six years after the adjudicator’s decision on the merits, to set the adjudicator’s decision aside.
III. Conclusion
[131] In my view, the Court of Appeal was correct in deciding that the human rights adjudicator in this case had jurisdiction to hear the dispute. Accordingly, I would dismiss the appeal.
Appeal allowed, Karakatsanis J. dissenting.
Solicitors for the appellant: Pitblado, Winnipeg.
Solicitors for the respondent Linda Horrocks: Champ & Associates, Ottawa.
Solicitors for the respondent the Manitoba Human Rights Commission: MLT Aikins, Winnipeg.
Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of British Columbia: Attorney General of British Columbia, Vancouver.
Solicitors for the intervener Don Valley Community Legal Services: Monkhouse Law, Toronto.
Solicitors for the intervener the Canadian Association of Counsel to Employers: Neuman Thompson, Edmonton.
Solicitor for the intervener the Canadian Human Rights Commission: Canadian Human Rights Commission, Ottawa.
Solicitors for the intervener the British Columbia Council of Administrative Tribunals: Pulleyblank Law Corporation, Vancouver.
Solicitor for the intervener the Empowerment Council, Systemic Advocates in Addictions and Mental Health: Karen R. Spector, Toronto.

Fraser v. Canada (Attorney General)
Collection
Supreme Court Judgments
Date
2020-10-16
Neutral citation
2020 SCC 28
Case number
38505
Judges
Wagner, Richard; Abella, Rosalie Silberman; Moldaver, Michael J.; Karakatsanis, Andromache; Côté, Suzanne; Brown, Russell; Rowe, Malcolm; Martin, Sheilah; Kasirer, Nicholas
On appeal from
Federal Court of Appeal
Subjects
Constitutional law
Notes
Case in Brief SCC Case Information
Decision Content
SUPREME COURT OF CANADA
Citation: Fraser v. Canada (Attorney General), 2020 SCC 28
Appeal Heard: December 12, 2019 Judgment Rendered: October 16, 2020 Docket: 38505
Between:
Joanne Fraser, Allison Pilgrim and Colleen Fox
Appellants
and
Attorney General of Canada
Respondent
- and -
Attorney General of Ontario, Attorney General of Quebec, Women’s Legal Education and Action Fund Inc., Public Service Alliance of Canada and National Police Federation
Interveners
Coram: Wagner C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Côté, Brown, Rowe, Martin and Kasirer JJ.
Reasons for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 139)
Joint Dissenting Reasons: (paras. 140 to 230)
Dissenting Reasons: (paras. 231 to 256)
Abella J. (Wagner C.J. and Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Martin and Kasirer JJ. concurring)
Brown and Rowe JJ.
Côté J.
Note: This document is subject to editorial revision before its reproduction in final form in the Canada Supreme Court Reports.
fraser v. canada (attorney general)
Joanne Fraser,
Allison Pilgrim and
Colleen Fox Appellants
v.
Attorney General of Canada Respondent
and
Attorney General of Ontario,
Attorney General of Quebec,
Women’s Legal Education and Action Fund Inc.,
Public Service Alliance of Canada and
National Police Federation Interveners
Indexed as: Fraser v. Canada (Attorney General)
2020 SCC 28
File No.: 38505.
2019: December 12; 2020: October 16.
Present: Wagner C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Côté, Brown, Rowe, Martin and Kasirer JJ.
on appeal from the federal court of appeal
Constitutional law — Charter of Rights — Right to equality — Discrimination based on sex — Adverse impact discrimination — Systemic discrimination — RCMP allowing members to job‑share — Job‑sharing members not allowed under pension plan to buy back pension credits — Job‑sharers are mostly women — Retired members claiming that pension consequences of job‑sharing have discriminatory impact on women and violate their constitutional right to equality — Whether limitation on job‑sharers’ ability to buy back pension credits discriminates on basis of sex — If so, whether infringement justified — Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, ss. 1 , 15(1) — Royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Act , R.S.C. 1985, c. R‑11 — Royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Regulations, C.R.C., c. 1393.
The claimants are three retired members of the RCMP who took maternity leave in the early‑to‑mid 1990s. Upon returning to full‑time service, they experienced difficulties combining their work obligations with their childcare responsibilities. At the time, the RCMP did not permit regular members to work part‑time. In December 1997, the RCMP introduced a job‑sharing program in which members could split the duties and responsibilities of one full‑time position. The three claimants enrolled in the job‑sharing program; they and most of the other RCMP members who job‑shared were women with children. Pursuant to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Act , and the associated Royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Regulations (“pension plan”), RCMP members can treat certain gaps in full‑time service, such as leave without pay, as fully pensionable. The claimants expected that job‑sharing would be eligible for full pension credits. However, they were later informed that they would not be able to purchase full‑time pension credit for their job‑sharing service.
The claimants initiated an application arguing that the pension consequences of job‑sharing have a discriminatory impact on women contrary to s. 15(1) of the Charter . Their claim failed at the Federal Court. The application judge found that job‑sharing is part‑time work for which participants cannot obtain full‑time pension credit and that this outcome did not violate s. 15(1). The application judge held that there was insufficient evidence that job‑sharing was disadvantageous compared to leave without pay. The Federal Court of Appeal dismissed the claimants’ appeal.
Held (Côté, Brown and Rowe JJ. dissenting): The appeal should be allowed.
Per Wagner C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Martin and Kasirer JJ.: Full‑time RCMP members who job‑share must sacrifice pension benefits because of a temporary reduction in working hours. This arrangement has a disproportionate impact on women and perpetuates their historical disadvantage. It is a clear violation of their right to equality under s. 15(1) of the Charter .
To prove a prima facie violation of s. 15(1), a claimant must demonstrate that the impugned law or state action, on its face or in its impact, creates a distinction based on enumerated or analogous grounds, and imposes burdens or denies a benefit in a manner that has the effect of reinforcing, perpetuating, or exacerbating disadvantage. The claimants contend that the negative pension consequences of job‑sharing infringe s. 15(1) because they have an adverse impact on women. Resolving their claim requires considering how adverse impact discrimination is applied.
Adverse impact discrimination occurs when a seemingly neutral law has a disproportionate impact on members of groups protected on the basis of an enumerated or analogous ground. There is no doubt that adverse impact discrimination violates the norm of substantive equality which underpins the Court’s equality jurisprudence. Substantive equality requires attention to the full context of the claimant group’s situation, to the actual impact of the law on that situation, and to the persistent systemic disadvantages that have operated to limit the opportunities available to that group’s members. At the heart of substantive equality is the recognition that identical or facially neutral treatment may frequently produce serious inequality. This is precisely what happens when seemingly neutral laws ignore the true characteristics of a group which act as headwinds to the enjoyment of society’s benefits.
The same two‑step approach to s. 15(1) applies regardless of whether the discrimination alleged is direct or indirect. At the first step, in order for a law to create a distinction based on prohibited grounds through its effects, it must have a disproportionate impact on members of a protected group. A law, for example, may include seemingly neutral rules, restrictions or criteria that operate in practice as “built‑in headwinds” for members of protected groups. In other cases, the problem is not “headwinds” built into a law, but the absence of accommodation for members of protected groups.
Two types of evidence will be especially helpful in proving that a law has a disproportionate impact on members of a protected group. The first is evidence about the situation of the claimant group. Courts will benefit from evidence about the physical, social, cultural or other barriers which provide the full context of the claimant group’s situation. The goal of such evidence is to show that membership in the claimant group is associated with certain characteristics that have disadvantaged members of the group. These links may reveal that seemingly neutral policies are designed well for some and not for others.
Courts will also benefit from evidence about the outcomes that the impugned law or policy has produced in practice. This evidence may provide concrete proof that members of protected groups are being disproportionately impacted. The evidence may include statistics, especially if the pool of people adversely affected by a criterion or standard includes both members of a protected group and members of more advantaged groups. The goal of statistical evidence is to establish a disparate pattern of exclusion or harm that is statistically significant and not simply the result of chance. The weight given to statistics will depend on, among other things, their quality and methodology.
Ideally, claims of adverse effects discrimination should be supported by evidence about the circumstances of the claimant group and the results produced by the challenged law. However, both kinds of evidence are not always required. In some cases, evidence about a group will show such a strong association with certain traits that the disproportionate impact on members of that group will be apparent and immediate. Similarly, clear and consistent statistical disparities can show a disproportionate impact on members of protected groups, even if the precise reason for that impact is unknown. In such cases, the statistical evidence is itself a compelling sign that the law has not been structured in a way that takes into account the group’s circumstances.
In sum, both evidence of statistical disparity and of broader group disadvantage may demonstrate disproportionate impact, but neither is mandatory and their significance will vary depending on the case. Whether the legislature intended to create a disproportionate impact is irrelevant. Proof of discriminatory intent has never been required to establish a claim under s. 15(1), and an ameliorative purpose is not sufficient to shield legislation from s. 15(1) scrutiny.
If claimants successfully demonstrate that a law has a disproportionate impact on members of a protected group, they need not also prove that the protected characteristic “caused” the disproportionate impact. It is also unnecessary for them to prove that the law itself was responsible for creating the background social or physical barriers which made a particular rule, requirement or criterion disadvantageous. In addition, claimants need not show that the impugned law affects all members of a protected group in the same way. The fact that discrimination is only partial does not convert it into non‑discrimination, and differential treatment can occur on the basis of an enumerated ground despite the fact that not all persons belonging to the relevant group are mistreated.
The second step of the s. 15 test — whether the law has the effect of reinforcing, perpetuating, or exacerbating disadvantage — will usually proceed similarly in cases of direct and indirect discrimination. The goal is to examine the impact of the harm caused to the affected group, which must be viewed in light of any systemic or historical disadvantages faced by the claimant group. The presence of social prejudices or stereotyping are not necessary factors in the s. 15(1) inquiry, and the perpetuation of disadvantage does not become less serious under s. 15(1) simply because it was relevant to a legitimate state objective. The test for a prima facie breach of s. 15(1) is concerned with the discriminatory impact of legislation on disadvantaged groups, not with whether the distinction is justified, an inquiry properly left to s. 1. Similarly, there is no burden on a claimant to prove that the distinction is arbitrary to prove a prima facie breach of s. 15(1). It is for the government to demonstrate that the law is not arbitrary in its justificatory submissions under s. 1.
Full‑time RCMP members who work regular hours, who are suspended, or who go on unpaid leave can obtain full pension credit for those periods of service under the pension plan, but full‑time members who temporarily reduce their hours under a job‑sharing agreement are classified as part‑time workers under the Regulations and are unable to acquire full‑time pension credit for their service. The question is whether this arrangement has a disproportionate impact on women.
In relying on the claimants’ “choice” to job‑share as grounds for dismissing their claim, the Federal Court and Court of Appeal misapprehended the Court’s s. 15(1) jurisprudence. The Court has consistently held that differential treatment can be discriminatory even if it is based on choices made by the affected individual or group. The Federal Court and Court of Appeal also engaged in a formalistic comparison between the remuneration offered under job‑sharing and leave without pay, even though s. 15(1) guarantees the claimants and others in the job‑sharing program the right to substantive equality with respect to full‑time RCMP workers.
Under a proper assessment, the s. 15(1) claim succeeds. The use of an RCMP member’s temporary reduction in working hours as a basis to impose less favourable pension consequences plainly has a disproportionate impact on women. The relevant evidence showed that RCMP members who worked reduced hours in the job‑sharing program were predominantly women with young children. These statistics were bolstered by compelling evidence about the disadvantages women face as a group in balancing professional and domestic work. This evidence shows the clear association between gender and fewer or less stable working hours, and demonstrates that the RCMP’s use of a temporary reduction in working hours as a basis for imposing less favourable pension consequences has an adverse impact on women.
This adverse impact perpetuates a long‑standing source of disadvantage to women: gender biases within pension plans, which have historically been designed for middle and upper‑income full‑time employees with long service, typically male. Because the RCMP’s pension design perpetuates a long‑standing source of economic disadvantage for women, there is a prima facie breach of s. 15 based on the enumerated ground of sex.
Section 1 allows the state to justify a limit on a Charter right as demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society. To start, the state must identify a pressing and substantial objective for limiting the Charter right. The Attorney General has identified no pressing and substantial policy concern, purpose or principle that explains why job‑sharers should not be granted full‑time pension credit for their service. On the contrary, this limitation is entirely detached from the purposes of both the job‑sharing scheme and the buy‑back provisions. Job‑sharing was clearly intended as a substitute for leave without pay for those members who could not take such leave due to personal or family circumstances. It is unclear, then, what purpose is served by treating the two forms of work reduction differently when extending pension buy‑back rights. The government has not offered a compelling objective for this differential treatment.
Since the prima facie breach cannot be justified under s. 1, it is a violation of s. 15(1) to preclude the claimants and their colleagues from buying back their pension credits. The appropriate remedy is a declaration that there has been a breach of the s. 15(1) rights of full‑time RCMP members who temporarily reduced their working hours under a job‑sharing agreement, because of the inability of those members to buy back full pension credit for that service.
Per Brown and Rowe JJ. (dissenting): The RCMP pension plan does not violate s. 15 of the Charter in its application to members who job‑share by denying them the right to accrue full‑time pension credit for periods when they job‑shared for childcare reasons. While the pension plan does create a distinction that, in its impact, is based on sex, its effect cannot be to hinder government efforts to address pre‑existing inequality. Any disadvantage the claimants face is caused not by the impugned provisions or any government action, but by the unequal division of household and family responsibilities and social circumstances such as the availability of quality childcare. Substantive equality has become almost infinitely malleable, allowing judges to invoke it as rhetorical cover for their own policy preferences in deciding a given case. This discretion does not accord with, but rather departs from, the rule of law.
Understanding the pension plan and the underlying legislative scheme in its entirety is key to adjudicating the s. 15 claim. It is incumbent on the Court to understand and account for how the scheme operates as a whole. The only employment statuses provided for under the pension plan are full‑time, part‑time, and leave without pay. There are no specific provisions relating to job‑sharing but the relevant policies define job‑sharing as a form of part‑time work. Job‑sharers are treated as working part‑time during the period in which they job‑share. As they work part‑time hours, they receive part‑time pension benefits for the period they job‑share.
The s. 15 test, as it is currently framed, can address claims of adverse‑impact discrimination by its inquiry into whether a law creates a distinction in its impact. At step one of the s. 15 test, it is not necessary to demonstrate that the impugned law or state action has the effect of contributing to an existing disadvantage. As a search for impact is a search for causation, establishing causation is critical. This is particularly so in instances where the state acts in order to address systemic discrimination given that the inquiry at step one is into whether the gap in outcomes is fully explained by pre‑existing disadvantage or whether state conduct has contributed to it. Section 15 is concerned with state conduct that contributes to pre‑existing disadvantage. The state does not have a freestanding positive obligation to remedy social inequalities and it can act incrementally, by putting in place policies that narrow a gap without closing it.
Ultimately, the onus is on the claimant to establish causation between the impugned law and the disadvantage. The analysis should not assume that correlation is the function of causation, where it might be the function of independent factors — correlation itself is not proof of causation. Where a law is enacted to incrementally narrow a pre‑existing systemic disadvantage without eradicating it, an element of disparity will necessarily remain. In such cases, it is not enough to refer to a statistical disparity and a broader group disadvantage.
The focus at step one on identifying a distinction is consistent with the comparative nature of equality. The two ways in which a distinction can be framed on the enumerated ground of sex in this case are by comparison to full‑time members and by comparison to members who take leave without pay. The comparison to members who take leave without pay is a distinction that is not based on sex because there is no evidence that members taking leave without pay are less likely to be women than members participating in the job‑sharing program. However, the distinction by comparison to full‑time members is a distinction based on sex because members of the job‑sharing program are disproportionately women, whereas uninterrupted full‑time employment is a male pattern of employment. Therefore, the pension plan creates a distinction that, in its impact, is based on sex.
Step two of the s. 15 analysis asks whether that distinction is discriminatory in that it fails to respond to the actual capacities and needs of the group and instead imposes burdens or denies a benefit in a manner that has the effect of reinforcing, perpetuating, or exacerbating the disadvantage of women. The analysis at this step must consider whether the unequal impact corresponds with a group’s actual circumstances or needs or whether it is in any other sense substantively discriminatory.
To establish substantive discrimination, an element of arbitrariness or unfairness has always been required in the s. 15 analysis. Factors relating to arbitrariness or unfairness must not be confined to the s. 1 analysis. The element of arbitrariness or unfairness has been most often expressed as a failure to respond to individuals’ capacities, needs and circumstances but it does not need to take the form of promoting negative attitudes. It has never been confused with a discriminatory purpose, which is not required to establish substantive discrimination. Substantive discrimination cannot be reduced to historical disadvantage. In some circumstances, laws can maintain significant disadvantage while treating individuals equally and without discrimination. Substantive equality has become so vague that it is impossible for claimants or legislatures to anticipate its demands in advance. Legislatures are instead effectively expected to hit a moving target.
It is not arbitrary or unfair and therefore not discriminatory for an employer to prorate compensation, including benefits, according to hours worked when this responds to employees’ actual capacities and circumstances. Employers must be able to compensate employees based on hours worked and offering pension benefits that are prorated to hours worked is not substantive discrimination. In accordance with the contextual analysis of the broader scheme, the provisions on leave without pay remain an important consideration at step two even though the distinction based on members who job‑share compared to those who take leave without pay is not based on sex. Offering pension benefits that are prorated to hours worked does not become substantive discrimination where members who take leave without pay have the right to buy back hours of pension benefits, because the focus of the contextual analysis must be on the actual impact of the law in its full context and must consider each benefit program in full.
In the case at bar, the record does not suggest that the lines drawn are inappropriate, having regard to all the circumstances. The pension plan does not represent a source of ongoing systemic disadvantage as it does not contribute to women’s systemic disadvantage; nor does it reinforce, perpetuate, or exacerbate the pre‑existing disadvantage of women in the workplace which arises in part from unequal distribution of parental responsibilities. The impugned provisions of the pension plan represent an example of a government acting incrementally to address inequities that exist in society, using provisions that do not have a discriminatory impact. The legislation is ameliorative in both intent and effect.
Given that s. 15(1) of the Charter is not infringed, there is no need to consider s. 1
Per Côté J. (dissenting): The claim fails at step one of the s. 15(1) analysis because the impugned provisions of the pension plan do not create a distinction on the basis of the enumerated ground of sex. The effect of the impugned provisions of the pension plan is to create a distinction not on the basis of being a woman, that is, sex simpliciter, but on the basis of caregiving responsibilities alone or as a result of a combination of sex with caregiver status.
The impugned provisions of the pension plan that discriminate against those with caregiving responsibilities do not necessarily discriminate against women. There is disagreement that, in effect, discrimination on the basis of childcare is tantamount to discrimination on the basis of sex due to their historical association with one another because caregiving status can be separated from sex; rather, same‑sex couples with children, as well as those individuals with elderly caregiving responsibilities will all be disproportionately affected.
Disproportionate impact alone is not sufficient to meet step one of the s. 15(1) analysis. Ultimately, in cases of adverse effect discrimination, the question under step one is whether the law, while facially neutral, creates an adverse distinction based on an enumerated or analogous ground. Step one includes a requirement of causation, nexus or tether between the impugned provisions and their effect. It cannot be satisfied in the absence of such a nexus between the impugned law and the disproportionate impact. In cases of adverse effect discrimination, step one is a step at which claimants have more work to do, unlike at s. 1, where the burden is placed on the government. If disproportionate impact alone were sufficient, this would invite statistics‑based litigation which would not be desirable, in part because statistics are constantly shifting.
In the present case, the claim is on behalf of women with children, and not simply women. It is critical that the claimants had caregiving responsibilities that made them decide to job‑share. The statistical disparity in results showing that women are disproportionately affected — given that the majority of job‑sharers are women with children — is insufficient to say that step one has been met. There is no reason why job‑sharing is a singularly sex‑based issue: rather, it is a caregiving status issue because job‑sharing is a solution for all members with caregiving responsibilities, not just a solution for those of a certain sex who have children.
In light of the conclusion that any distinction depends not on sex but on caregiving responsibility and that the Court has not recognized caregiving, parental, or family status as an analogous ground, in this case, the claimants’ contention must fail at step one of the s. 15(1) analysis. To be sure, the impugned provisions may very well not be rational — there may indeed be no logical reason to deprive job‑sharers of full pension benefits that are guaranteed to full‑time members and members on leave without pay. But it is not the Court’s role to constitutionalize normative judgments to this effect; that is the role of the electorate, and in turn, the legislature. It therefore falls to the legislature, not the courts, to remedy any under‑inclusiveness in this legislation, which purportedly was meant to assist with caregiving responsibilities in the first place.
As no distinction can be made out on the basis of sex, there is no need to proceed to the second step of the analysis.
Cases Cited
By Abella J.
Referred to: Quebec (Attorney General) v. A, 2013 SCC 5, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 61; Kahkewistahaw First Nation v. Taypotat, 2015 SCC 30, [2015] 2 S.C.R. 548; Quebec (Attorney General) v. Alliance du personnel professionnel et technique de la santé et des services sociaux, 2018 SCC 17, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 464; Centrale des syndicats du Québec v. Quebec (Attorney General), 2018 SCC 18, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 522; Withler v. Canada (Attorney General), 2011 SCC 12, [2011] 1 S.C.R. 396; Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424 (1971); British Columbia (Public Service Employee Relations Commission) v. BCGSEU, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 3; Canada (Human Rights Commission) v. Taylor, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 892; Ontario Human Rights Commission v. Simpsons‑Sears Ltd., [1985] 2 S.C.R. 536; Canadian National Railway Co. v. Canada (Canadian Human Rights Commission), [1987] 1 S.C.R. 1114; Andrews v. Law Society of British Columbia, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 143, rev’g (1986), 2 B.C.L.R. (2d) 305; R. v. Kapp, 2008 SCC 41, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 483; Eldridge v. British Columbia (Attorney General), [1997] 3 S.C.R. 624; Vriend v. Alberta, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 493; McKinney v. University of Guelph, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 229; Tétreault‑Gadoury v. Canada (Employment and Immigration Commission), [1991] 2 S.C.R. 22; Law v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 497; Eaton v. Brant County Board of Education, [1997] 1 S.C.R. 241; British Columbia (Superintendent of Motor Vehicles) v. British Columbia (Council of Human Rights), [1999] 3 S.C.R. 868; Moore v. British Columbia (Education), 2012 SCC 61, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 360; Egan v. Canada, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 513; Central Alberta Dairy Pool v. Alberta (Human Rights Commission), [1990] 2 S.C.R. 489; R. v. Spence, 2005 SCC 71, [2005] 3 S.C.R. 458; Homer v. Chief Constable of West Yorkshire Police, [2012] UKSC 15, [2012] 3 All E.R. 1287; Vancouver Area Network of Drug Users v. Downtown Vancouver Business Improvement Association, 2018 BCCA 132, 10 B.C.L.R. (6th) 175; Gaz métropolitain inc. v. Commission des droits de la personne et des droits de la jeunesse, 2011 QCCA 1201; Oršuš v. Croatia, No. 15766/03, ECHR 2010‑II; Essop v. Home Office (U.K. Border Agency), [2017] UKSC 27, [2017] 3 All E.R. 551; O’Connor v. Bar Standards Board, [2017] UKSC 78, [2018] 2 All E.R. 779; D.H. v. the Czech Republic, No. 57325/00, ECHR 2007‑IV; Horváth and Kiss v. Hungary, [2013] E.L.R. 102; R. v. Turpin, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1296; Brooks v. Canada Safeway Ltd., [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1219; Janzen v. Platy Enterprises Ltd., [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1252; Nova Scotia (Workers’ Compensation Board) v. Martin, 2003 SCC 54, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 504; Miron v. Trudel, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 418; Lavoie v. Canada, 2002 SCC 23, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 769; Nova Scotia (Attorney General) v. Walsh, 2002 SCC 83, [2002] 4 S.C.R. 325; Moge v. Moge, [1992] 3 S.C.R. 813; New Brunswick (Minister of Health and Community Services) v. G. (J.), [1999] 3 S.C.R. 46; Symes v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 695; Young v. Young, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 3; Jenkins v. Kingsgate (Clothing Productions) Ltd, C‑96/80, [1981] E.C.R. I‑911; Bilka‑Kaufhaus GmbH v. Weber von Hartz, C‑170/84, [1986] E.C.R. I‑1607; Rinner‑Kühn v. FWW Spezial‑Gebäudereinigung GmbH, C‑171/88, [1989] E.C.R. I‑2743; Vroege v. NCIV Instituut voor Volkshuisvesting BV, C‑57/93, [1994] E.C.R. I‑4541; Schönheit v. Stadt Frankfurt am Main, C‑4/02 and C‑5/02, [2003] E.C.R. I‑12575; Reg. v. Secretary of State for Employment, Ex parte Equal Opportunities Commission, [1995] 1 A.C. 1; London Underground Ltd. v. Edwards (No. 2), [1999] I.C.R. 494; Phillips v. Martin Marietta Corp., 400 U.S. 542 (1971); Bostock v. Clayton County, Georgia, 140 S. Ct. 1731 (2020); Campbell River & North Island Transition Society v. Health Sciences Assn. of British Columbia, 2004 BCCA 260, 28 B.C.L.R. (4th) 292; Brown v. Department of National Revenue (1993), 93 CLLC ¶17,013; Canada (Attorney General) v. Johnstone, 2014 FCA 110, [2015] 2 F.C.R. 595; Misetich v. Value Village Stores Inc., 2016 HRTO 1229, 39 C.C.E.L. (4th) 129; Thibaudeau v. Canada, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 627; Canada (Attorney General) v. Lesiuk (C.A.), 2003 FCA 3, [2003] 2 F.C. 697; R. v. Oakes, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 103; Vancouver (City) v. Ward, 2010 SCC 27, [2010] 2 S.C.R. 28; Doucet‑Boudreau v. Nova Scotia (Minister of Education), 2003 SCC 62, [2003] 3 S.C.R. 3.
By Brown and Rowe JJ. (dissenting)
Quebec (Attorney General) v. Canada (Attorney General), 2015 SCC 14, [2015] 1 S.C.R. 693; Quebec (Attorney General) v. Alliance du personnel professionnel et technique de la santé et des services sociaux, 2018 SCC 17, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 464; Withler v. Canada (Attorney General), 2011 SCC 12, [2011] 1 S.C.R. 396; Vriend v. Alberta, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 493; RWDSU v. Dolphin Delivery Ltd., [1986] 2 S.C.R. 573; Centrale des syndicats du Québec v. Quebec (Attorney General), 2018 SCC 18, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 522; Public Service Alliance of Canada v. Canada (Department of National Defence) (C.A.), [1996] 3 F.C. 789; Newfoundland (Treasury Board) v. N.A.P.E., 2004 SCC 66, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 381; Kahkewistahaw First Nation v. Taypotat, 2015 SCC 30, [2015] 2 S.C.R. 548; Andrews v. Law Society of British Columbia, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 143; R. v. Kapp, 2008 SCC 41, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 483; Winko v. British Columbia (Forensic Psychiatric Institute), [1999] 2 S.C.R. 625; Quebec (Attorney General) v. A, 2013 SCC 5, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 61; Snell v. Farrell, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 311; Blatch v. Archer (1774), 1 Cowp. 63, 98 E.R. 969; Auton (Guardian ad litem of) v. British Columbia (Attorney General), 2004 SCC 78, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 657; Gosselin v. Quebec (Attorney General), 2002 SCC 84, [2002] 4 S.C.R. 429; Corbiere v. Canada (Minister of Indian and Northern Affairs), [1999] 2 S.C.R. 203; Hodge v. Canada (Minister of Human Resources Development), 2004 SCC 65, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 357; Law v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 497; IBM Canada Limited v. Waterman, 2013 SCC 70, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 985; Parry v. Cleaver, [1970] A.C. 1; Egan v. Canada, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 513; R. v. Edwards Books and Art Ltd., [1986] 2 S.C.R. 713; Williamson v. Lee Optical of Oklahoma, 348 U.S. 483 (1955); McKinney v. University of Guelph, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 229; Schachter v. Canada, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 679; Alberta (Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development) v. Cunningham, 2011 SCC 37, [2011] 2 S.C.R. 670; Thibaudeau v. Canada, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 627; Lovelace v. Ontario, 2000 SCC 37, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 950; Ferrel v. Ontario (Attorney General) (1998), 42 O.R. (3d) 97; British Columbia (Public Service Employee Relations Commission) v. BCGSEU, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 3; Baldwin v. Missouri, 281 U.S. 586 (1930); R. v. Nova Scotia Pharmaceutical Society, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 606; Irwin Toy Ltd. v. Quebec (Attorney General), [1989] 1 S.C.R. 927; Law Society of British Columbia v. Trinity Western University, 2018 SCC 32, [2018] 2 S.C.R. 293.
By Côté J. (dissenting)
Public Service Alliance of Canada v. Canada (Department of National Defence) (C.A.), [1996] 3 F.C. 789; Quebec (Attorney General) v. Alliance du personnel professionnel et technique de la santé et des services sociaux, 2018 SCC 17, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 464; Gosselin v. Quebec (Attorney General), 2002 SCC 84, [2002] 4 S.C.R. 429; Andrews v. Law Society of British Columbia, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 143; R. v. Kapp, 2008 SCC 41, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 483; Withler v. Canada (Attorney General), 2011 SCC 12, [2011] 1 S.C.R. 396; Quebec (Attorney General) v. A, 2013 SCC 5, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 61; Kahkewistahaw First Nation v. Taypotat, 2015 SCC 30, [2015] 2 S.C.R. 548; Centrale des syndicats du Québec v. Quebec (Attorney General), 2018 SCC 18, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 522; Brooks v. Canada Safeway Ltd., [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1219; D.H. v. the Czech Republic, No. 57325/00, ECHR 2007‑IV; Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424 (1971); Washington, Mayor of Washington, D.C. v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229 (1976); Watson v. Fort Worth Bank & Trust, 487 U.S. 977 (1988); Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs v. Inclusive Communities Project, Inc., 135 S. Ct. 2507 (2015); Ricci v. DeStefano, 557 U.S. 557 (2009); Smith v. City of Jackson, Mississippi, 544 U.S. 228 (2005); Symes v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 695; Miceli‑Riggins v. Canada (Attorney General), 2013 FCA 158, [2014] 4 F.C.R. 709; Grenon v. Minister of National Revenue, 2016 FCA 4, 482 N.R. 310; Canada (Attorney General) v. Lesiuk (C.A.), 2003 FCA 3, [2003] 2 F.C. 697; Begum v. Canada (Citizenship and Immigration), 2018 FCA 181, [2019] 2 F.C.R. 488.
Statutes and Regulations Cited
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , ss. 1 , 3 , 14 , 15 , 20 , 23 , 32 .
Income Tax Act , R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .).
Income Tax Regulations, C.R.C., c. 945.
Royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Act , R.S.C. 1985, c. R‑11, ss. 5 , 6 , 7(1) , 29.2 .
Royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Regulations, C.R.C., c. 1393, ss. 2.1, 5.2(1), 5.4, 10(1), (4), 10.1, 10.8.
Treaties and Other International Instruments
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, U.N. Doc. A/CONF.177/20, October 17, 1995.
Authors Cited
Bingham, Tom. The Rule of Law. London: Allen Lane, 2010.
Bisom‑Rapp, Susan. “What We Know About Equal Employment Opportunity Law After Fifty Years of Trying” (2018), 22 Employee Rts. & Employment Pol’y J. 337.
Bisom‑Rapp, Susan, and Malcolm Sargeant. “It’s Complicated: Age, Gender, and Lifetime Discrimination Against Working Women — The United States and the U.K. as Examples” (2014), 22 Elder L.J. 1.
Braun, Evelyn. “Adverse Effect Discrimination: Proving the Prima Facie Case” (2005), 11 Rev. Const. Stud. 119.
British Columbia Law Institute. Human Rights and Family Responsibilities: Family Status Discrimination under Human Rights Law in British Columbia and Canada. Vancouver, 2012.
Canada. Commission of Inquiry into Part‑time Work. Part‑time Work in Canada: Report of the Commission of Inquiry into Part‑time Work. Ottawa: Labour Canada, 1983.
Canada. House of Commons. House of Commons Debates, vol. VI, 3rd Sess., 34th Parl., February 24, 1992, p. 7487.
Canada. Royal Commission on Equality in Employment. Report of the Commission on Equality in Employment. Ottawa: Supply and Services Canada, 1984.
Canada. Royal Commission on the Status of Women in Canada. Report of the Royal Commission on the Status of Women in Canada. Ottawa, 1970.
Canada. Statistics Canada. Table 11-10-0055-01 — High income tax filers in Canada (online: https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=1110005501; archived version: https://www.scc-csc.ca/cso-dce/2020SCC-CSC28_1_eng.pdf).
Canada. Statistics Canada. Women in Canada: A Gender‑based Statistical Report, 7th ed. by Melissa Moyser. Ottawa, 2017.
Canadian Institute for Health Information. Nursing in Canada, 2019: A Lens on Supply and Workforce. Ottawa, 2020.
Chaykowski, Richard P., and Lisa M. Powell. “Women and the Labour Market: Recent Trends and Policy Issues” (1999), 25 Can. Pub. Pol’y S1.
Collins, Hugh, and Tarunabh Khaitan. “Indirect Discrimination Law: Controversies and Critical Questions”, in Hugh Collins and Tarunabh Khaitan, eds., Foundations of Indirect Discrimination Law. Portland, Or.: Hart Publishing, 2018, 1.
Craig, Elaine. “Family as Status in Doe v. Canada: Constituting Family Under Section 15 of the Charter ” (2007), 20 N.J.C.L. 197.
Demers, Diane L. “La discrimination systémique: variation sur un concept unique” (1993), 8 C.J.L.S. 83.
Eberts, Mary, and Kim Stanton. “The Disappearance of the Four Equality Rights and Systemic Discrimination from Canadian Equality Jurisprudence” (2018), 38 N.J.C.L. 89.
Eisen, Jessica. “Grounding Equality in Social Relations: Suspect Classification, Analogous Grounds and Relational Theory” (2017), 42 Queen’s L.J. 41.
Faraday, Fay. “One Step Forward, Two Steps Back? Substantive Equality, Systemic Discrimination and Pay Equity at the Supreme Court of Canada” (2020), 94 S.C.L.R. (2d) 301.
Fredman, Sandra. “Direct and Indirect Discrimination: Is There Still a Divide?”, in Hugh Collins and Tarunabh Khaitan, eds., Foundations of Indirect Discrimination Law. Portland, Or.: Hart Publishing, 2018, 31.
Fredman, Sandra. Discrimination Law, 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2011.
Fredman, Sandra. “The Reason Why: Unravelling Indirect Discrimination” (2016), 45 Indus. L.J. 231.
Gopnik, Adam. “The illiberal imagination: Are liberals on the wrong side of history?”, The New Yorker, March 20, 2017, 88.
Hogg, Peter W. Constitutional Law of Canada, vol. 2, 5th ed. Supp. Toronto: Thomson Reuters, 2019 (loose‑leaf updated 2019, release 1).
Hughes, Patricia. “Supreme Court of Canada Equality Jurisprudence and ‘Everyday Life’” (2012), 58 S.C.L.R. (2d) 245.
International Labour Organization. Rights, jobs and social security: New visions for older women and men. Geneva, 2008.
Kanee, Lyle, and Adam Cembrowski. “Family Status Discrimination and the Obligation to Self‑Accommodate” (2018), 14 J.L. & Equality 61.
Kaplan, Ari, and Mitch Frazer. Pension Law, 2nd ed. Toronto: Irwin Law, 2013.
Khaitan, Tarunabh. A Theory of Discrimination Law. New York: Oxford University Press, 2015.
Khaitan, Tarunabh, and Sandy Steel. “Wrongs, Group Disadvantage and the Legitimacy of Indirect Discrimination Law”, in Hugh Collins and Tarunabh Khaitan, eds., Foundations of Indirect Discrimination Law. Portland, Or.: Hart Publishing, 2018, 197.
Koshan, Jennifer, and Jonnette Watson Hamilton. “Meaningless Mantra: Substantive Equality after Withler” (2011), 16 Rev. Const. Stud. 31.
Law Commission of Ontario. Vulnerable Workers and Precarious Work. Toronto, 2012.
Lawrence, Sonia. “Choice, Equality and Tales of Racial Discrimination: Reading the Supreme Court on Section 15”, in Sheila McIntyre and Sanda Rodgers, eds., Diminishing Returns: Inequality and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis, 2006, 115.
Macpherson, Suzi. “Reconciling employment and family care‑giving: a gender analysis of current challenges and future directions for UK policy”, in Nicole Busby and Grace James, eds., Families, Care‑giving and Paid Work: Challenging Labour Law in the 21st Century. Northampton, Mass.: Edward Elgar Publishing, 2011, 13.
Majury, Diana. “Women Are Themselves to Blame: Choice as a Justification for Unequal Treatment”, in Fay Faraday, Margaret Denike and M. Kate Stephenson, eds., Making Equality Rights Real: Securing Substantive Equality under the Charter. Toronto: Irwin Law, 2006, 209.
McIntyre, Sheila. “Deference and Dominance: Equality Without Substance”, in Sheila McIntyre and Sanda Rodgers, eds., Diminishing Returns: Inequality and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis, 2006, 95.
Miller, Bradley W. “Justification and Rights Limitations”, in Grant Huscroft, ed., Expounding the Constitution: Essays in Constitutional Theory. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010, 93.
Miller, Bradley W. “Majoritarianism and Pathologies of Judicial Review”, in Grégoire Webber et al., Legislated Rights: Securing Human Rights through Legislation. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2018, 181.
Mize, Selene. “Indirect Discrimination Reconsidered” (2007), N.Z.L. Rev. 27.
Monahan, Patrick J., Byron Shaw and Padraic Ryan. Constitutional Law, 5th ed. Toronto: Irwin Law, 2017.
Moran, Mayo. “Protesting Too Much: Rational Basis Review Under Canada’s Equality Guarantee”, in Sheila McIntyre and Sanda Rodgers, eds., Diminishing Returns: Inequality and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis, 2006, 71.
Moreau, Sophia. “The Moral Seriousness of Indirect Discrimination”, in Hugh Collins and Tarunabh Khaitan, eds., Foundations of Indirect Discrimination Law. Portland, Or.: Hart Publishing, 2018, 123.
Moreau, Sophia. “What Is Discrimination?” (2010), 38 Philosophy & Public Affairs 143.
National Action Committee on the Status of Women. Brief on Equality for Women in Pensions, Taxation and Federal Benefits to Parents. Toronto, 1985.
Ontario. Gender Wage Gap Strategy Steering Committee. Final Report and Recommendations of the Gender Wage Gap Strategy Steering Committee. Toronto, 2016.
Ontario. Ontario Human Rights Commission. The Cost of Caring: Report on the Consultation on Discrimination on the Basis of Family Status. Toronto, 2006.
Ontario. Royal Commission on the Status of Pensions in Ontario. Report of the Royal Commission on the Status of Pensions in Ontario. Toronto, 1980.
Osborne‑Brown, Sheila. “Discrimination and Family Status: The Test, the Continuing Debate, and the Accommodation Conversation” (2018), 14 J.L. & Equality 87.
Philipps, Lisa, and Margot Young. “Sex, Tax and the Charter : A Review of Thibaudeau v. Canada” (1995), 2 Rev. Const. Stud. 221.
Pothier, Dianne. “Connecting Grounds of Discrimination to Real People’s Real Experiences” (2001), 13 C.J.W.L. 37.
Pothier, Dianne. “M’Aider, Mayday: Section 15 of the Charter in Distress” (1996), 6 N.J.C.L. 295.
Pothier, Dianne. “Tackling Disability Discrimination at Work: Toward a Systemic Approach” (2010), 4 M.J.L.H. 17.
Puchta, Alicja. “Quebec v A and Taypotat: Unpacking the Supreme Court’s Latest Decisions on Section 15 of the Charter ” (2018), 55 Osgoode Hall L.J. 665.
Réaume, Denise G. “Harm and Fault in Discrimination Law: The Transition from Intentional to Adverse Effect Discrimination” (2001), 2 Theor. Inq. L. 349.
Rivet, Michèle, et Anne‑Marie Santorineos. “Juger à l’ère des droits fondamentaux” (2012), 42 R.D.U.S. 363.
Sangiuliano, Anthony Robert. “Substantive Equality As Equal Recognition: A New Theory of Section 15 of the Charter ” (2015), 52 Osgoode Hall L.J. 601.
Sealy‑Harrington, Joshua. “Assessing Analogous Grounds: The Doctrinal and Normative Superiority of a Multi‑Variable Approach” (2013), 10 J.L. & Equality 37.
Sharpe, Robert J. Good Judgment: Making Judicial Decisions. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2018.
Sheppard, Colleen. “Grounds of Discrimination: Towards an Inclusive and Contextual Approach” (2001), 80 Can. Bar Rev. 893.
Sheppard, Colleen. Inclusive Equality: The Relational Dimensions of Systemic Discrimination in Canada. Montréal: McGill‑Queen’s University Press, 2010.
Sheppard, Colleen. “Mapping anti‑discrimination law onto inequality at work: Expanding the meaning of equality in international labour law” (2012), 151 Int’l Lab. Rev. 1.
Sheppard, Colleen. “Of Forest Fires and Systemic Discrimination: A Review of British Columbia (Public Service Employee Relations Commission) v. B.C.G.S.E.U.” (2001), 46 McGill L.J. 533.
Shilton, Elizabeth. “Family Status Discrimination: ‘Disruption and Great Mischief’ or Bridge over the Work‑Family Divide?” (2018), 14 J.L. & Equality 33.
Shilton, Elizabeth. “Gender Risk and Employment Pension Plans in Canada” (2013), 17 C.L.E.L.J. 101.
Vizkelety, Béatrice. Proving Discrimination in Canada. Toronto: Carswell, 1987.
Watson Hamilton, Jonnette, and Jennifer Koshan. “Adverse Impact: The Supreme Court’s Approach to Adverse Effects Discrimination under Section 15 of the Charter ” (2015), 19 Rev. Const. Stud. 191.
Watson Hamilton, Jonnette, and Jennifer Koshan. “Equality Rights and Pay Equity: Déjà Vu in the Supreme Court of Canada” (2019), 15 J.L. & Equality 1.
Watson Hamilton, Jonnette, and Jennifer Koshan. “Kahkewistahaw First Nation v. Taypotat: An Arbitrary Approach to Discrimination” (2016), 76 S.C.L.R. (2d) 243.
Young, Claire. “Pensions, Privatization, and Poverty: The Gendered Impact” (2011), 23 C.J.W.L. 661.
Young, Margot. “Blissed Out: Section 15 at Twenty”, in Sheila McIntyre and Sanda Rodgers, eds., Diminishing Returns: Inequality and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis, 2006, 45.
Young, Margot. “Unequal to the Task: ‘Kapp’ing the Substantive Potential of Section 15” (2010), 50 S.C.L.R. (2d) 183.
Yowell, Paul. Constitutional Rights and Constitutional Design: Moral and Empirical Reasoning in Judicial Review. Portland, Or.: Hart Publishing, 2018.
APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal (Gauthier, Gleason and Woods JJ.A.), 2018 FCA 223, [2019] 2 F.C.R. 541, 426 C.R.R. (2d) 190, 44 C.C.P.B. (2nd) 167, 2019 CLLC ¶230‑018, [2018] F.C.J. No. 1228 (QL), 2018 CarswellNat 7614 (WL Can.), affirming a decision of Kane J., 2017 FC 557, [2017] F.C.J. No. 609 (QL), 2017 CarswellNat 2726 (WL Can.). Appeal allowed, Côté, Brown and Rowe JJ. dissenting.
Paul Champ and Bijon Roy, for the appellants.
Christopher M. Rupar, Zoe Oxaal and Gregory Tzemenakis, for the respondent.
Rochelle S. Fox and Yashoda Ranganathan, for the intervener the Attorney General of Ontario.
Amélie Pelletier Desrosiers and Catheryne Bélanger, for the intervener the Attorney General of Quebec.
Danielle Bisnar, Kate Hughes and Janet Borowy, for the intervener the Women’s Legal Education and Action Fund Inc.
Andrew Astritis and Morgan Rowe, for the intervener the Public Service Alliance of Canada.
Christopher Rootham and Andrew Montague‑Reinholdt, for the intervener the National Police Federation.
The judgment of Wagner C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Martin and Kasirer JJ. was delivered by
Abella J. —
[1] In 1970, the Royal Commission on the Status of Women in Canada set out a galvanic blueprint for redressing the legal, economic, social and political barriers to full and fair participation faced by Canadian women for generations. Many of the inequities it identified have been spectacularly reversed, and the result has been enormous progressive change for women in this country. But despite the sweep of legislative initiatives and the positive realignment of many social expectations, the long reach of entrenched assumptions about the role of women in a family continues to leave its mark on what happens in the workplace.
[2] One of the ways it does so is in how women are remunerated generally; the corollary is how they are remunerated when they seek to combine work with family responsibilities by working part‑time. As the Royal Commission noted, “ways must be found to provide [part-time] employees with pay and working conditions no less equitable than those provided for the full-time worker” (Report of the Royal Commission on the Status of Women in Canada, at p. 105). Fifty years later, this appeal raises that very issue.
[3] Members of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (“RCMP”) receive benefits upon retirement from a pension plan. Greater benefits are provided to members with a record of high pay and long, uninterrupted full‑time service. Certain gaps in a member’s record of service — such as being suspended or time spent on unpaid leave — can be filled in through a “buy back” process, leaving the member’s pension benefits unaffected. No such choice is available to full‑time members who temporarily reduced their working hours under a job-sharing agreement. Nearly all of the participants in the job-sharing program are women and most of them reduced their hours of work because of child care.
[4] Three retired members of the RCMP claim that the pension consequences of job‑sharing have a discriminatory impact on women and violate s. 15(1) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . Their claim failed at the Federal Court (2017 FC 557). The application judge concluded that job-sharing is not disadvantageous when compared to unpaid leave and, even if it is, that any such disadvantage is the result of an individual employee’s choice to job-share, not her gender or family status. The Federal Court of Appeal upheld the application judge’s decision ([2019] 2 F.C.R. 541).
[5] I would allow the appeal. Full-time RCMP members who job‑share must sacrifice pension benefits because of a temporary reduction in working hours. This arrangement has a disproportionate impact on women and perpetuates their historical disadvantage. It is a clear violation of their right to equality under s. 15(1) of the Charter .
Background
[6] Ms. Fraser, Ms. Pilgrim and Ms. Fox served as police officers in the RCMP for over 25 years. Ms. Fraser was posted to Fort Saskatchewan, Alberta, where she worked rotating 10‑hour shifts, 7 days a week. Ms. Pilgrim worked in the Commercial Crime Unit in Quebec City. Ms. Fox began her policing work in Toronto before being transferred to a small community in central Newfoundland.
[7] Ms. Fraser, Ms. Pilgrim and Ms. Fox took maternity leaves in the early‑to‑mid 1990s. Upon returning to full‑time service, they experienced difficulties combining their work obligations with caring for their children. Ms. Fraser described feeling “overwhelmed” as she tried to balance work and family; Ms. Pilgrim felt like she was “on a treadmill”; and Ms. Fox described the experience as “hell on earth”. These difficulties caused Ms. Fox to retire from the RCMP in 1994 and resulted in Ms. Fraser taking unpaid leave in 1997. At the time, the RCMP did not permit regular members to work part-time.
[8] In December 1997, the RCMP introduced a job-sharing program to provide members with an alternative to taking leave without pay. Under the job-sharing program, two or three RCMP members could split the duties and responsibilities of one full-time position, which allowed each participant to work fewer hours than a full‑time employee. Parties to a job‑sharing agreement could be asked, on one month’s notice, to resume full-time work based on administrative or operational needs.
[9] Job-sharing was meant to be “mutually beneficial” for the RCMP and participating members. Participants were able to “remain operationally connected to the Force while having a work schedule that better accommodated their individual circumstances” (Appeal Record, vol. V, at p. 810). The RCMP benefitted from the participants’ services, which helped, among other things, in addressing staff shortages in smaller communities and in emergency situations.
[10] Ms. Fraser, Ms. Fox and Ms. Pilgrim enrolled in the job‑sharing program along with 137 other RCMP members between 1997 and 2011. Most participants were women with children. From 2010 to 2014, all RCMP members who job-shared were women, and most of them cited childcare as their reason for joining the program.
[11] After enrolling in the job‑sharing program, Ms. Fraser, Ms. Fox and Ms. Pilgrim became aware that their participation would have consequences for their pensions. Understanding those consequences requires a brief review of the RCMP’s pension plan.
[12] All RCMP members engaged to work at least 12 hours a week must enrol in and contribute to a statutory pension plan.[1] Upon retirement, members receive benefits based on, among other things, their years of service.[2] One year of work counts as one year of pensionable service. More years of pensionable service lead to higher pension benefits.
[13] Years of full-time work and part‑time work are treated differently when pension benefits are calculated. Part-time work is pro‑rated to reflect the lower number of hours worked. It is therefore less valuable than full‑time work in the formula used to calculate pension benefits.
[14] RCMP members acquire full‑time pension credit for periods of service in which they were engaged to work 40 hours a week. Members can also treat certain gaps in full-time service, such as leave without pay, as fully pensionable. Upon returning from unpaid leave, a member can “buy back” the service they missed by making the contributions that both she and the RCMP would have made had she been actively employed. This increases the member’s years of full‑time pensionable service, which results in a more valuable pension.
[15] Ms. Fraser, Ms. Fox and Ms. Pilgrim expected that job‑sharing, like leave without pay, would be eligible for full pension credit. Both situations, they noted, involve a temporary interruption in regular service for full‑time members — a decrease to between 12 and less than 40 hours of work a week when job-sharing, and to 0 hours a week when on unpaid leave. It was logical, in their view, that members in both situations would be allowed to “buy back” their lost service and associated pension benefits.
[16] The RCMP initially accepted this position in communications with Ms. Pilgrim. Subsequently, however, the RCMP took the position that job-sharing was part‑time work for which participants could not receive full-time pension credit.
[17] When informed that they would not be able to purchase full‑time pension credit for their job‑sharing service, participants in the program raised concerns with senior management. In a memo to the RCMP’s commissioner, 14 female members from across Canada explained why they considered the pension consequences of job‑sharing to be illogical and unfair:
Members returning to full‑time work from maternity leave, LWOP [Leave without Pay], SFLWOP [Self-funded Leave without Pay], and Disciplinary Actions (Suspended without Pay) are given the opportunity to buy back their pension benefits. Members returning to work from extended periods of ODS [Off Duty Sick] and Disciplinary Actions (Suspended with Pay) maintain their pension benefits, despite not working. Members who have departed the Force and are subsequently re‑engaged are able to buy back their pension. . . . Thus, it would seem logical that members returning to full‑time work from job‑share arrangements would be entitled to the same opportunity to purchase pension benefits.
. . .
Job‑sharing is a progressive, proactive and innovative step for the RCMP. It is time to support members who choose to job-share, rather than penalizing them for choosing an option the Force has made available. It is important for management to remember that it is not only the member who benefits from job-sharing, but also the RCMP. Job-sharing allows the Force to retain its investment in human resources; members with training, skills and seniority. It provides a pool of trained people who can be called on in emergency situations. Members who job-share stay current with changing technology, legislation and training, among other things, because they are still working. Why is the RCMP penalizing those who choose to job-share when it stands to benefit from the arrangement?
[18] The RCMP’s then-assistant commissioner, G. J. Loeppky, responded to the memo and acknowledged that there “may be an element of unfairness” to the RCMP’s approach. He presented the matter to the RCMP Pension Advisory Committee, which retained an actuary to provide advice on available options. The actuary acknowledged that the RCMP’s pension plan could be amended under the Income Tax Act and Income Tax Regulations[3] to extend pension buy-back rights to participants in the job-sharing program. The actuary noted that the flexibility under the Income Tax Regulations “is particularly useful in responding to employee requests for reduced work-hours at various stages of their family life or career” (p. 459).
[19] While this process was ongoing, three female RCMP members filed internal grievances challenging the denial of their requests to buy back full‑time pension credit for their job-sharing service. The RCMP External Review Committee found in their favour. The Committee saw no legal barriers to the RCMP’s defining job‑sharing as a combination of hours worked and a period of leave without pay. The Committee cited a similar Treasury Board policy about the working hours of certain public service employees on the verge of retirement:
. . . there was a precedent for such a categorization. In 1999, the Treasury Board instituted a program of pre‑retirement transition leave by introducing the Pre‑retirement Transition Leave Policy. This policy allowed certain Public Service employees close to retirement to reduce their hours of work by up to 40%. Their pay was reduced accordingly, but the hours not worked were treated as LWOP with respect to pay, deductions, allowances, other leave, benefits, and pensions.
[20] The RCMP’s Acting Commissioner, William Sweeney, did not follow the External Review Committee’s recommendations and dismissed the grievances. In his view, it was not legally possible for job‑sharing to be defined as a combination of full‑time work and leave without pay. Although “immensely sympathetic” to the grievances, he concluded that the classification of job‑sharing as part-time work was not discriminatory.
[21] After the Commissioner’s decision, Ms. Fraser, Ms. Fox and Ms. Pilgrim started this Charter application. They advanced two submissions. First, they argued that the pension plan, properly interpreted, allows participants in the job‑sharing program to acquire full pension credit. Second, if this was not possible, they argued that the pension plan violates s. 15(1) of the Charter because it prevents women with children — the majority of participants in the job-sharing program — from contributing to their pensions in the same way as members who work full-time or take leave without pay. In support of their application, Ms. Fraser, Ms. Fox and Ms. Pilgrim filed expert evidence and other material addressing the disadvantages women with children face in the labour force.
[22] The application judge found that job-sharing is part‑time work for which participants cannot obtain full‑time pension credit. This outcome, in her view, did not violate s. 15(1) because there was insufficient evidence that job-sharing was disadvantageous compared to unpaid leave. Even assuming that there were negative consequences to job-sharing, these outcomes were the result of a participant’s choice to job-share. The Charter application was therefore dismissed.
[23] An appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal was unsuccessful. The court held that job-sharing RCMP members did not receive inferior compensation to members on leave without pay, and that any adverse impact on job-sharing participants flowed from their choice to work part-time, not from the pension plan.
[24] For the reasons that follow, I would allow the appeal.
Analysis
[25] Unlike full‑time members who work regular hours,[4] who are suspended or who take unpaid leave, full‑time RCMP members who job-share are classified as part‑time workers under the Regulations and cannot, under the terms of the pension plan, obtain full‑time pension credit for their service. Ms. Fraser and her colleagues submit that this limitation violates s. 15(1) of the Charter on the basis of sex and, alternatively, on the basis of family/parental status.
[26] Section 15(1) of the Charter states:
15. (1) Every individual is equal before and under the law and has the right to the equal protection and equal benefit of the law without discrimination and, in particular, without discrimination based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, age or mental or physical disability.
[27] Section 15(1) reflects a profound commitment to promote equality and prevent discrimination against disadvantaged groups (Quebec (Attorney General) v. A, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 61, at para. 332; Kahkewistahaw First Nation v. Taypotat, [2015] 2 S.C.R. 548, at paras. 19‑20). To prove a prima facie violation of s. 15(1), a claimant must demonstrate that the impugned law or state action:
• on its face or in its impact, creates a distinction based on enumerated or analogous grounds; and
• imposes burdens or denies a benefit in a manner that has the effect of reinforcing, perpetuating, or exacerbating disadvantage.
(Quebec (Attorney General) v. Alliance du personnel professionnel et technique de la santé et des services sociaux, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 464, at para. 25; Centrale des syndicats du Québec v. Quebec (Attorney General), [2018] 1 S.C.R. 522, at para. 22.)
[28] Ms. Fraser does not suggest that the negative pension consequences of job‑sharing are explicitly based on sex. Rather, she claims that they have an adverse impact on women with children.
[29] How adverse impact or systemic discrimination is applied has received extensive academic consideration (see, for example, Colleen Sheppard, Inclusive Equality: The Relational Dimensions of Systemic Discrimination in Canada (2010), at pp. 19‑21; Evelyn Braun, “Adverse Effect Discrimination: Proving the Prima Facie Case” (2005), 11 Rev. Const. Stud. 119; Jonnette Watson Hamilton and Jennifer Koshan, “Adverse Impact: The Supreme Court’s Approach to Adverse Effects Discrimination under Section 15 of the Charter ” (2015), 19 Rev. Const. Stud. 191; Michèle Rivet and Anne‑Marie Santorineos, “Juger à l’ère des droits fondamentaux” (2012), 42 R.D.U.S. 363, at p. 374; Diane L. Demers, “La discrimination systémique: variation sur un concept unique” (1993), 8 C.J.L.S. 83; Lisa Philipps and Margot Young, “Sex, Tax and the Charter : A Review of Thibaudeau v. Canada” (1995), 2 Rev. Const. Stud. 221). As Prof. Colleen Sheppard notes:
Why is it so critical to expand on our understanding of adverse effect discrimination? If we do not, there is a significant risk that discrimination embedded in apparently neutral institutional policies, rules, or procedures will not be recognized as discriminatory. This risk is accentuated by the necessity in anti‑discrimination law to connect the experience of exclusion, harm, prejudice, or disadvantage to a recognized ground of discrimination. . . . We need a sophisticated and coherent theory of adverse effect discrimination to assist claimants, lawyers, and adjudicators with the complexities of the manifestations of systemic discrimination.
(“Of Forest Fires and Systemic Discrimination: A Review of British Columbia (Public Service Employee Relations Commission) v. B.C.G.S.E.U.” (2001), 46 McGill L.J. 533, at p. 542; see also Braun, at p. 122.)
[30] It is helpful to start by defining the concept. Adverse impact discrimination occurs when a seemingly neutral law has a disproportionate impact on members of groups protected on the basis of an enumerated or analogous ground (see Watson Hamilton and Koshan (2015), at p. 196; Sheppard (2001), at p. 549; see also Withler v. Canada (Attorney General), [2011] 1 S.C.R. 396, at para. 64; Taypotat, at para. 22). Instead of explicitly singling out those who are in the protected groups for differential treatment, the law indirectly places them at a disadvantage (Sophia Moreau, “What Is Discrimination?” (2010), 38 Philosophy & Public Affairs 143, at p. 155).
[31] Increased awareness of adverse impact discrimination has been a “central trend in the development of discrimination law”, marking a shift away from a fault‑based conception of discrimination towards an effects‑based model which critically examines systems, structures, and their impact on disadvantaged groups (Denise G. Réaume, “Harm and Fault in Discrimination Law: The Transition from Intentional to Adverse Effect Discrimination” (2001), 2 Theor. Inq. L. 349, at pp. 350‑51; see also Béatrice Vizkelety, Proving Discrimination in Canada (1987), at p. 18; Sheppard (2010), at pp. 19‑20). Accompanying this shift was the recognition that discrimination is “frequently a product of continuing to do things ‘the way they have always been done’”, and that governments must be “particularly vigilant about the effects of their own policies” on members of disadvantaged groups (Fay Faraday, “One Step Forward, Two Steps Back? Substantive Equality, Systemic Discrimination and Pay Equity at the Supreme Court of Canada” (2020), 94 S.C.L.R. (2d) 301, at p. 310; Sophia Moreau, “The Moral Seriousness of Indirect Discrimination”, in Hugh Collins and Tarunabh Khaitan, eds., Foundations of Indirect Discrimination Law (2018), 123, at p. 145).
[32] Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424 (1971) was one of the first cases to apply this concept and is a classic example of adverse impact discrimination. An employer required employees to have a high school diploma and pass standardized tests to work in certain departments at a power plant. Neither requirement was significantly related to successful job performance; both, however, had the effect of disqualifying African Americans at a substantially higher rate than white applicants.
[33] The United States Supreme Court held that the education and testing requirements infringed Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Pub. L. 88-352, 78 Stat. 241 (1964). The court emphasized that the Act prohibits “practices that are fair in form, but discriminatory in operation”:
Congress has now provided that tests or criteria for employment or promotion may not provide equality of opportunity merely in the sense of the fabled offer of milk to the stork and the fox. On the contrary, Congress has now required that the posture and condition of the job seeker be taken into account. It has — to resort again to the fable — provided that the vessel in which the milk is proffered be one all seekers can use. The Act proscribes not only overt discrimination but also practices that are fair in form, but discriminatory in operation. . . . Good intent or absence of discriminatory intent does not redeem employment procedures or testing mechanisms that operate as “built-in headwinds” for minority groups and are unrelated to measuring job capability. [Emphasis added; pp. 431‑32.]
[34] Griggs explains that the application of “neutral” rules may not produce equality in substance for disadvantaged groups. Membership in such groups often brings with it a unique constellation of physical, economic and social barriers. Laws which distribute benefits or burdens without accounting for those differences — without accounting for the “posture and condition of the job seeker”, as in Griggs — are the prime targets of indirect discrimination claims. I agree with Profs. Lisa Philipps and Margot Young that
we are not always conscious of the ways in which the distinctions we draw . . . will implicate group identities and single out specific groups for distinctive treatment. This is because the constellations of factors or characteristics that go into the construction of identities often masquerade as unconnected, purely individual traits, behaviours, choices, or situations. Yet, in social reality they may be tightly linked to one group or another. So the law has had to recognize that state action may be discriminatory even though on its face and in terms of the intentions informing it there is no obvious evidence that such discrimination is occurring. [p. 258]
(See also Sandra Fredman, Discrimination Law (2nd ed. 2011), at pp. 38 and 108.)
[35] Addressing adverse impact discrimination can be among the “most powerful legal measures available to disadvantaged groups in society to assert their claims to justice” (Hugh Collins and Tarunabh Khaitan, “Indirect Discrimination Law: Controversies and Critical Questions”, in Hugh Collins and Tarunabh Khaitan, eds., Foundations of Indirect Discrimination Law (2018), 1, at p. 30). Not only is such discrimination “much more prevalent than the cruder brand of openly direct discrimination”,[5] it often poses a greater threat to the equality aspirations of disadvantaged groups:
. . . even more common are situations where the discrimination occurs in a context like an employment relationship, government program or statute, or educational setting, and there is no single identifiable “villain”, no single action identifiable as “discriminatory”, and the outward appearance of a neutral set of rules or practices being applied across the board. This invisible structure, with its accompanying set of practices, is a powerful limit on the equality aspirations of many who must deal within that structure but have characteristics that do not match those of persons intended to benefit from the structure.
(Mary Eberts and Kim Stanton, “The Disappearance of the Four Equality Rights and Systemic Discrimination from Canadian Equality Jurisprudence” (2018), 38 N.J.C.L. 89, at p. 92)
[36] By recognizing the exclusionary impact of such discrimination, courts can better address “discrimination in its diverse forms”, including at “the systemic or institutional level” (Vizkelety, at p. viii; see also Colleen Sheppard, “Mapping anti‑discrimination law onto inequality at work: Expanding the meaning of equality in international labour law” (2012), 151 Int’l Lab. Rev. 1, at p. 8; Faraday, at p. 319). Remedying adverse effects discrimination allows courts
[to] go to the heart of the equality question, to the goal of transformation, to an examination of the way institutions and relations must be changed in order to make them available, accessible, meaningful and rewarding for the many diverse groups of which our society is composed.
(Meiorin, at para. 41, quoting Shelagh Day and Gwen Brodsky, “The Duty to Accommodate: Who Will Benefit?” (1996), 75 Can. Bar Rev. 433, at p. 462)
[37] This Court first dealt with adverse impact discrimination in Ontario Human Rights Commission v. Simpsons‑Sears Ltd., [1985] 2 S.C.R. 536. Employees at a department store were periodically required to work on Friday evenings and Saturdays. Theresa O’Malley, an employee of the store and a member of the Seventh‑Day Adventist Church, was required by her faith to observe the Sabbath from sundown Friday until sundown Saturday. She brought a complaint against the store under the Ontario Human Rights Code, R.S.O. 1980, c. 340, claiming that the rule requiring her to work on Saturdays discriminated against her on the basis of religion.
[38] Writing for a unanimous Court, McIntyre J. agreed. He stressed that the Ontario Human Rights Code was meant to provide protection against the “result or the effect” of discriminatory conduct (p. 547). Citing Griggs and several Canadian decisions, McIntyre J. concluded that the Act prohibited adverse effects discrimination, which he distinguished from direct discrimination as follows:
A distinction must be made between what I would describe as direct discrimination and the concept already referred to as adverse effect discrimination in connection with employment. Direct discrimination occurs in this connection where an employer adopts a practice or rule which on its face discriminates on a prohibited ground. For example, “No Catholics or no women or no blacks employed here.” There is, of course, no disagreement in the case at bar that direct discrimination of that nature would contravene the Act. On the other hand, there is the concept of adverse effect discrimination. It arises where an employer for genuine business reasons adopts a rule or standard which is on its face neutral, and which will apply equally to all employees, but which has a discriminatory effect upon a prohibited ground on one employee or group of employees in that it imposes, because of some special characteristic of the employee or group, obligations, penalties, or restrictive conditions not imposed on other members of the work force. [p. 551]
[39] Simpsons‑Sears was the first of several human rights decisions where this Court grappled with adverse effects discrimination. In Canadian National Railway Co. v. Canada (Canadian Human Rights Commission), [1987] 1 S.C.R. 1114 (“Action Travail”), Dickson C.J. upheld a discrimination claim against an employer whose hiring and promotion practices led to women being drastically under‑represented in certain jobs. Some of these practices were neutral on their face; Dickson C.J., however, highlighted the importance of looking “at the results of a system”:
A thorough study of “systemic discrimination” in Canada is to be found in the Abella Report on equality in employment.
. . .
Discrimination . . . means practices or attitudes that have, whether by design or impact, the effect of limiting an individual’s or a group’s right to the opportunities generally available because of attributed rather than actual characteristics . . . .
It is not a question of whether this discrimination is motivated by an intentional desire to obstruct someone’s potential, or whether it is the accidental by‑product of innocently motivated practices or systems. If the barrier is affecting certain groups in a disproportionately negative way, it is a signal that the practices that lead to this adverse impact may be discriminatory.
This is why it is important to look at the results of a system . . . . [Emphasis added; pp. 1138-39.]
[40] These principles were soon imported into the Court’s s. 15 jurisprudence. In Andrews v. Law Society of British Columbia, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 143, the Court rejected a “sameness” or formal theory of equality, instead identifying substantive equality as the philosophical premise of s. 15 and outlining a theory of equality centred on “the impact of the law on the individual or the group concerned” (p. 165). In developing this theory, McIntyre J. emphatically rejected the approach to s. 15 adopted by the British Columbia Court of Appeal, which had defined the “essential meaning” of equality as ensuring that the “similarly situated be similarly treated” ((1986), 2 B.C.L.R. (2d) 305, at p. 311, quoting Joseph Tussman and Jacobus tenBroek, “The Equal Protection of the Laws” (1949), 37 Cal. L. Rev. 341, at p. 344). Justice McIntyre described this approach as “seriously deficient”, on the basis that “mere equality of application to similarly situated groups or individuals does not afford a realistic test for a violation of equality rights” (pp. 165‑67).
[41] Drawing on the Court’s human rights jurisprudence, while recognizing that “not all distinctions and differentiations created by law are discriminatory” (at p. 182), McIntyre J. endorsed an approach to equality and discrimination that was centred on the actual effects, rather than the purpose or facial neutrality of a law on a claimant group:
I would say then that discrimination may be described as a distinction, whether intentional or not but based on grounds relating to personal characteristics of the individual or group, which has the effect of imposing burdens, obligations, or disadvantages on such individual or group not imposed upon others, or which withholds or limits access to opportunities, benefits, and advantages available to other members of society. [p. 174]
Andrews provided a robust template for substantive equality that subsequent decisions “enriched but never abandoned” (R. v. Kapp, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 483, at para. 14). It was a remedy for exclusion and a recipe for inclusion.
[42] Our subsequent decisions left no doubt that substantive equality is the “animating norm” of the s. 15 framework (Withler, at para. 2; see also Kapp, at paras. 15‑16; Alliance, at para. 25); and that substantive equality requires attention to the “full context of the claimant group’s situation”, to the “actual impact of the law on that situation”, and to the “persistent systemic disadvantages [that] have operated to limit the opportunities available” to that group’s members (Withler, at para. 43; Taypotat, at para. 17; see also Quebec v. A, at paras. 327‑32; Alliance, at para. 28; Centrale, at para. 35).
[43] The Court, applying these principles, has acknowledged the existence of adverse impact discrimination under s. 15(1). In Eldridge v. British Columbia (Attorney General), [1997] 3 S.C.R. 624, the Court recognized that there is a disparate impact on persons with hearing loss in a health‑care system in which they are unable to access interpreters. The Court confirmed that a s. 15(1) violation could arise through “the adverse effects of rules of general application” (para. 77).
[44] Similarly, in Vriend v. Alberta, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 493, the Court declared unconstitutional an Alberta human rights statute which did not include sexual orientation as a prohibited ground of discrimination, because of its “disproportionate impact” on members of the LGBTQ+ community:
. . . there is, on the surface, a measure of formal equality: gay or lesbian individuals have the same access as heterosexual individuals to the protection of the [Act] in the sense that they could complain to the Commission about an incident of discrimination on the basis of any of the grounds currently included. However, the exclusion of the ground of sexual orientation, considered in the context of the social reality of discrimination against gays and lesbians, clearly has a disproportionate impact on them as opposed to heterosexuals. Therefore the [Act] in its underinclusive state denies substantive equality to the former group. [Emphasis added; para. 82.]
[45] Several other decisions of this Court have confirmed that “not only does the Charter protect from direct or intentional discrimination, it also protects from adverse impact discrimination” (McKinney v. University of Guelph, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 229, at p. 279; Tétreault‑Gadoury v. Canada (Employment and Immigration Commission), [1991] 2 S.C.R. 22, at p. 41; see also Law v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 497, at para. 36; Withler, at para. 64; Taypotat, at para. 23).
[46] The Court most recently addressed this issue in Taypotat. While concluding that there was no discrimination demonstrated on the facts of the case, the Court acknowledged that “facially neutral qualifications like education requirements” can be a breach of s. 15(1) because of their “disproportionate effect” on protected groups (paras. 15 and 22).
[47] There is no doubt, therefore, that adverse impact discrimination “violate[s] the norm of substantive equality” which underpins this Court’s equality jurisprudence (Withler, at para. 2). At the heart of substantive equality is the recognition that identical or facially neutral treatment may “frequently produce serious inequality” (Andrews, at p. 164). This is precisely what happens when “neutral” laws ignore the “true characteristics of [a] group which act as headwinds to the enjoyment of society’s benefits” (Eaton v. Brant County Board of Education, [1997] 1 S.C.R. 241, at para. 67; Eldridge, at para. 65).
[48] The “animating norm” of the current s. 15 framework guaranteeing substantive equality is also the core value engaged in cases of adverse effects discrimination (Withler, at para. 2; Watson Hamilton and Koshan (2015), at pp. 192 and 197). This Court has never suggested that cases of adverse impact discrimination should be resolved under a different approach (see, for example, Andrews, at pp. 173‑74; Eldridge, at paras. 59‑60; Vriend, at paras. 81‑82 and 87‑89; Law, at paras. 36‑39; Taypotat, at paras. 19‑22; Alliance, at para. 25). On the contrary, we have clarified that the same approach applies regardless of whether the discrimination alleged is direct or indirect. Withler leaves little doubt on this point:
The substantive equality analysis under s. 15(1), as discussed earlier, proceeds in two stages . . . . The role of comparison at the first step is to establish a “distinction”.
. . .
In some cases, identifying the distinction will be relatively straightforward, because a law will, on its face, make a distinction on the basis of an enumerated or analogous ground (direct discrimination) . . . . In other cases, establishing the distinction will be more difficult, because what is alleged is indirect discrimination: that although the law purports to treat everyone the same, it has a disproportionately negative impact on a group or individual that can be identified by factors relating to enumerated or analogous grounds . . . . In that kind of case, the claimant will have more work to do at the first step. Historical or sociological disadvantage may assist in demonstrating that the law imposes a burden or denies a benefit to the claimant that is not imposed on or denied to others. The focus will be on the effect of the law and the situation of the claimant group. [Emphasis added; paras. 61‑62 and 64.]
[49] In the human rights context, the Court has not used different legal tests for direct and indirect discrimination since Meiorin (paras. 50‑54; see also British Columbia (Superintendent of Motor Vehicles) v. British Columbia (Council of Human Rights), [1999] 3 S.C.R. 868, at paras. 18‑19; Moore v. British Columbia (Education), [2012] 3 S.C.R. 360, at para. 61). A unified approach, in my view, is equally justified under the Charter .
[50] To prove discrimination under s. 15(1), claimants must show that a law or policy creates a distinction based on a protected ground, and that the law perpetuates, reinforces or exacerbates disadvantage. These requirements do not require revision in adverse effects cases. What is needed, however, is a clear account of how to identify adverse effects discrimination, because the impugned law will not, on its face, include any distinctions based on prohibited grounds (Withler, at para. 64). Any such distinctions must be discerned by examining the impact of the law (Alliance, at para. 25).
[51] This inquiry has frequently been described as a search for a “disproportionate” impact on members of protected groups (see Vriend, at para. 82; Withler, at para. 64; Taypotat, at paras. 21‑23; Action Travail, at p. 1139; Egan v. Canada, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 513, at para. 138, per Cory and Iacobucci JJ. dissenting; Moreau (2010), at p. 154; Braun, at pp. 124‑25; Vizkelety, at p. 176; Watson Hamilton and Koshan (2015), at p. 196; Collins and Khaitan, at pp. 3‑4; Dianne Pothier, “M’Aider, Mayday: Section 15 of the Charter in Distress” (1996), 6 N.J.C.L. 295 at p. 322).
[52] In other words, in order for a law to create a distinction based on prohibited grounds through its effects, it must have a disproportionate impact on members of a protected group. If so, the first stage of the s. 15 test will be met.
[53] How does this work in practice? Instead of asking whether a law explicitly targets a protected group for differential treatment, a court must explore whether it does so indirectly through its impact on members of that group (see Eldridge, at paras. 60‑62; Vriend, at para. 82). A law, for example, may include seemingly neutral rules, restrictions or criteria that operate in practice as “built‑in headwinds” for members of protected groups. The testing requirement in Griggs is the paradigmatic example; other examples include the aerobic fitness requirement in Meiorin, and the policy requiring employees to work on Saturdays in Simpsons‑Sears (see also Central Alberta Dairy Pool v. Alberta (Human Rights Commission), [1990] 2 S.C.R. 489). To assess the adverse impact of these policies, courts looked beyond the facially neutral criteria on which they were based, and examined whether they had the effect of placing members of protected groups at a disadvantage (Moreau (2018), at p. 125).
[54] In other cases, the problem is not “headwinds” built into a law, but the absence of accommodation for members of protected groups (Tarunabh Khaitan, A Theory of Discrimination Law (2015), at p. 77; Dianne Pothier, “Tackling Disability Discrimination at Work: Toward a Systemic Approach” (2010), 4 M.J.L.H 17, at pp. 23‑24). Eldridge is a good example. Under the health care scheme in that case, all patients lacked access to sign language interpreters — but this lack of access had a disproportionate impact on those who had hearing loss and required interpreters to meaningfully communicate with health care providers (paras. 69, 71 and 83).
[55] Disproportionate impact can be proven in different ways. In Eldridge, it was established because “the quality of care received by [those with hearing loss] was inferior to that available to hearing persons” (para. 83 (emphasis added)). In Griggs and Meiorin, by contrast, the relevant impact was the higher rate at which African Americans and women were disqualified from employment. Both are examples of how a law or policy can have a disproportionate impact on members of a protected group. Griggs, Meiorin, and other leading cases leave no doubt that disproportionate impact can be established if members of protected groups are denied benefits or forced to take on burdens more frequently than others. A difference in “quality” of treatment, as in Eldridge, may strengthen a claim of disproportionate impact, but it is not a necessary element (Philipps and Young, at pp. 244‑45; see also Pothier (1996), at p. 322; Selene Mize, “Indirect Discrimination Reconsidered” (2007), N.Z.L. Rev. 27, at p. 39).
[56] Two types of evidence will be especially helpful in proving that a law has a disproportionate impact on members of a protected group. The first is evidence about the situation of the claimant group. The second is evidence about the results of the law.
[57] Courts will benefit from evidence about the physical, social, cultural or other barriers which provide the “full context of the claimant group’s situation” (Withler, at para. 43; see also para. 64). This evidence may come from the claimant, from expert witnesses, or through judicial notice (see R. v. Spence, [2005] 3 S.C.R. 458). The goal of such evidence is to show that membership in the claimant group is associated with certain characteristics that have disadvantaged members of the group, such as an inability to work on Saturdays or lower aerobic capacity (Homer v. Chief Constable of West Yorkshire Police, [2012] UKSC 15, [2012] 3 All E.R. 1287, at para. 14; Simpsons‑Sears; Meiorin, at para. 11). These links may reveal that seemingly neutral policies are “designed well for some and not for others” (Meiorin, at para. 41). When evaluating evidence about the group, courts should be mindful of the fact that issues which predominantly affect certain populations may be under‑documented. These claimants may have to rely more heavily on their own evidence or evidence from other members of their group, rather than on government reports, academic studies or expert testimony.
[58] Courts will also benefit from evidence about the outcomes that the impugned law or policy (or a substantially similar one) has produced in practice. Evidence about the “results of a system” may provide concrete proof that members of protected groups are being disproportionately impacted (Action Travail, at p. 1139; Vizkelety, at pp. 170‑74). This evidence may include statistics, especially if the pool of people adversely affected by a criterion or standard includes both members of a protected group and members of more advantaged groups (Sheppard (2001), at pp. 545‑46; Braun, at pp. 120‑21).
[59] There is no universal measure for what level of statistical disparity is necessary to demonstrate that there is a disproportionate impact, and the Court should not, in my view, craft rigid rules on this issue. The goal of statistical evidence, ultimately, is to establish “a disparate pattern of exclusion or harm that is statistically significant and not simply the result of chance” (Sheppard (2001), at p. 546; see also Vizkelety, at p. 175; Fredman (2011), at pp. 186‑87). The weight given to statistics will depend on, among other things, their quality and methodology (Vizkelety, at pp. 178‑84).
[60] Ideally, claims of adverse effects discrimination should be supported by evidence about the circumstances of the claimant group and about the results produced by the challenged law. Evidence about the claimant group’s situation, on its own, may amount to merely a “web of instinct” if too far removed from the situation in the actual workplace, community or institution subject to the discrimination claim (Taypotat, at para. 34). Evidence of statistical disparity, on its own, may have significant shortcomings that leave open the possibility of unreliable results. The weaknesses with each type of evidence can be overcome if they are both present (Braun, at p. 135; Vizkelety, at p. 192; Vancouver Area Network of Drug Users v. Downtown Vancouver Business Improvement Association (2018), 10 B.C.L.R. (6th) 175 (C.A.), at para. 98). Prof. Colleen Sheppard (2001) recognizes this possibility:
While in some cases the overwhelming correspondence between certain categories and the gender or racial composition of the category makes the sex or race discrimination claims relatively easy to substantiate, in other cases the statistical preponderance may be less marked. In such cases it may also be important to consider the qualitative components of the harm that constitutes discrimination. [p. 548]
[61] This is not to say, of course, that both kinds of evidence are always required. In some cases, evidence about a group will show such a strong association with certain traits — such as pregnancy with gender — that the disproportionate impact on members of that group “will be apparent and immediate” (Taypotat, at para. 33; see also Fredman (2011), at pp. 187‑88; Sheppard (2001), at pp. 544‑45; Gaz métropolitain inc. v. Commission des droits de la personne et des droits de la jeunesse, 2011 QCCA 1201, at paras. 27 and 47 (CanLII); Oršuš v. Croatia, No. 15766/03, ECHR 2010-II, at para. 153).
[62] Similarly, clear and consistent statistical disparities can show a disproportionate impact on members of protected groups, even if the precise reason for that impact is unknown. Prof. Sandra Fredman has argued forcefully against requiring claimants to specify “the reason why” they are being disadvantaged by a rule or policy:
To require the complainants to show the ‘reason why’ the PCP [policy, criteria or practice] disadvantages the group as a whole is to fundamentally misunderstand the meaning of indirect discrimination. It is the disparate impact on the group of a PCP itself which constitutes the prima facie discrimination . . . .
(“Direct and Indirect Discrimination: Is There Still a Divide?”, in Hugh Collins and Tarunabh Khaitan, eds., Foundations of Indirect Discrimination Law (2018), 31, at p. 46; see also Sandra Fredman, “The Reason Why: Unravelling Indirect Discrimination” (2016), 45 Indus. L.J. 231.)
[63] I agree. If there are clear and consistent statistical disparities in how a law affects a claimant’s group, I see no reason for requiring the claimant to bear the additional burden of explaining why the law has such an effect. In such cases, the statistical evidence is itself a compelling sign that the law has not been structured in a way that takes into account the protected group’s circumstances (see Fredman (2011), at p. 181; Vizkelety, at pp. 174‑76; Action Travail, at p. 1139).
[64] The United Kingdom Supreme Court reached a similar conclusion in Essop v. Home Office (U.K. Border Agency), [2017] UKSC 27, [2017] 3 All E.R. 551. At issue was a core skills assessment that immigration officers had to pass to be promoted. Racial minorities and older candidates were shown to be less likely to pass the assessment, but there was no evidence available to explain why this disparity was occurring (para. 9).
[65] The Supreme Court concluded that there was disparate impact. Lady Hale D.P.S.C. explained that a claimant does not need to “establish the reason for the particular disadvantage to which the group is put” (para. 33). She noted that such a requirement made it more difficult to combat “hidden barriers which are not easy to anticipate or to spot” (para. 25). She also recognized that it is “commonplace for the disparate impact, or particular disadvantage, to be established on the basis of statistical evidence” — which would be impossible if claimants had to offer an explanation for why any given statistical imbalances had occurred (para. 28).
[66] Essop confirmed a flexible approach to proving disparate impact, under which proof of statistical disparity and broader group disadvantage may each be sufficient to establish a claim, but are not rigid requirements (see also O’Connor v. Bar Standards Board, [2017] UKSC 78, [2018] 2 All E.R. 779, at para. 43). The European Court of Human Rights has similarly held that “when it comes to assessing the impact of a measure or practice on an individual or group, statistics which appear on critical examination to be reliable and significant will be sufficient to constitute the prima facie evidence the applicant is required to produce”; however, “[t]his does not . . . mean that indirect discrimination cannot be proved without statistical evidence” (D.H. v. the Czech Republic, No. 57325/00, ECHR 2007-IV, at para. 188 (emphasis added); see also Oršuš, at paras. 152‑53; Horváth and Kiss v. Hungary, [2013] E.L.R. 102 (E.C.H.R.), at para. 107).
[67] I agree with this approach. Both evidence of statistical disparity and of broader group disadvantage may demonstrate disproportionate impact; but neither is mandatory and their significance will vary depending on the case.
[68] Some further observations.
[69] First, whether the legislature intended to create a disparate impact is irrelevant (Sheppard (2001), at pp. 543‑44; Watson Hamilton and Koshan (2015), at pp. 196‑97; Faraday, at p. 310). Proof of discriminatory intent has never been required to establish a claim under s. 15(1) (Andrews, at pp. 173‑74; Eldridge, at para. 62; Vriend, at para. 93; Alliance, at para. 28; Centrale, at para. 35). Nor is an ameliorative purpose sufficient to shield legislation from s. 15(1) scrutiny (Centrale, at paras. 8 and 35; Alliance, at paras. 32‑33).
[70] Second, if claimants successfully demonstrate that a law has a disproportionate impact on members of a protected group, they need not independently prove that the protected characteristic “caused” the disproportionate impact (Tarunabh Khaitan and Sandy Steel, “Wrongs, Group Disadvantage and the Legitimacy of Indirect Discrimination Law”, in Hugh Collins and Tarunabh Khaitan, eds., Foundations of Indirect Discrimination Law (2018), 197, at pp. 203-4 and 220; Fredman (2018), at p. 46; Braun, at p. 146; Watson Hamilton and Koshan (2015), at p. 197; West Yorkshire Police, at paras. 12‑14; Essop, at paras. 24‑27). Put differently, there was no need for the claimant in Griggs to address whether his exclusion was based on his race or lack of a high school education. The whole point of the adverse impact analysis was to show that the use of a high school education as a criteria for employment had a disproportionate impact on African Americans (Fredman (2011), at p. 189).
[71] It is also unnecessary to inquire into whether the law itself was responsible for creating the background social or physical barriers which made a particular rule, requirement or criterion disadvantageous for the claimant group. Returning to Griggs, this would amount to asking whether Duke Power Co. was responsible for lower rates of high school education among African Americans. Plainly, it was not — but this was entirely irrelevant to whether a disproportionate impact had been established. Section 15(1) has always required attention to the systemic disadvantages affecting members of protected groups, even if the state did not create them (Alliance, at para. 41; Centrale, at para. 32; Vriend, at paras. 84 and 97; Eldridge, at paras. 64‑66; Eaton, at para. 67; R. v. Turpin, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1296, at pp. 1331‑32).
[72] Third, claimants need not show that the criteria, characteristics or other factors used in the impugned law affect all members of a protected group in the same way. This Court has long held that “[t]he fact that discrimination is only partial does not convert it into non‑discrimination” (Brooks v. Canada Safeway Ltd., [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1219, at p. 1248, quoting James MacPherson, “Sex Discrimination in Canada: Taking Stock at the Start of a New Decade” (1980), 1 C.H.R.R. C/7, at p. C/11). In Brooks, the Court held that a corporate plan which denied benefits to employees during pregnancy discriminated on the basis of sex. The employer argued that the plan did not deny benefits to “women”, but only to “women who are pregnant” (p. 1248, quoting MacPherson, at p. C/11). Writing for the Court, Dickson C.J. explained that practices amounting to “partial discrimination” are no less discriminatory than those in which all members of a protected group are affected (pp. 1247‑48).
[73] The Court reiterated this principle in Janzen v. Platy Enterprises Ltd., [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1252, where it held that the sexual harassment of two female employees was discrimination on the basis of sex. The Court rejected the employer’s argument that sex discrimination had not occurred because only some of the female employees at the store had been sexually harassed. Dickson C.J. reiterated the approach to partial discrimination he had previously set out in Brooks:
If a finding of discrimination required that every individual in the affected group be treated identically, legislative protection against discrimination would be of little or no value. It is rare that a discriminatory action is so bluntly expressed as to treat all members of the relevant group identically. In nearly every instance of discrimination the discriminatory action is composed of various ingredients with the result that some members of the pertinent group are not adversely affected, at least in a direct sense, by the discriminatory action. To deny a finding of discrimination in the circumstances of this appeal is to deny the existence of discrimination in any situation where discriminatory practices are less than perfectly inclusive. It is to argue, for example, that an employer who will only hire a woman if she has twice the qualifications required of a man is not guilty of sex discrimination if, despite this policy, the employer nevertheless manages to hire some women. [Emphasis added; pp. 1288-89.]
[74] The Court’s approach in Brooks and Janzen “had obvious implications for claims based on multiple grounds of discrimination” (Dianne Pothier, “Connecting Grounds of Discrimination to Real People’s Real Experiences” (2001), 13 C.J.W.L. 37, at p. 58). As Dianne Pothier has explained:
It is an easy step to move from saying, as in Janzen, that not all women need be affected to constitute sex discrimination to also accepting that different groups of women . . . can be differently affected by, or have different experiences of, sex discrimination. Janzen also meant that a claim based on, for example, both gender and race could not be defeated simply by saying that it could not be sex discrimination because white women were unaffected or that it could not be race discrimination because Black men were unaffected. [p. 58]
[75] The Court subsequently confirmed that “heterogeneity within a claimant group does not defeat a claim of discrimination” (Quebec v. A, at para. 354). In Quebec v. A, for example, the Court held that certain provisions of the Civil Code of Québec that distinguished between de facto and legally married spouses for the purposes of support and division, discriminated on the basis of marital status. It reached this conclusion even though there was “a range of need or vulnerability among de facto spouses” (para. 354). Similarly, in Nova Scotia (Workers’ Compensation Board) v. Martin, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 504, the Court held that a provincial compensation scheme that provided lesser benefits to those suffering from chronic pain, discriminated on the basis of disability. The Court confirmed that “differential treatment can occur on the basis of an enumerated ground despite the fact that not all persons belonging to the relevant group are equally mistreated” (para. 76; see also Centrale, at para. 28; Pothier (2010), at pp. 35-36; Watson Hamilton and Koshan (2015), at pp. 197‑98; Braun, at p. 147; Sheppard (2001), at p. 549).
[76] This brings us to the second step of the s. 15 test: whether the law has the effect of reinforcing, perpetuating, or exacerbating disadvantage (Alliance, at para. 25). This inquiry will usually proceed similarly in cases of disparate impact and explicit discrimination. There is no “rigid template” of factors relevant to this inquiry (Quebec v. A, at para. 331, quoting Withler, at para. 66). The goal is to examine the impact of the harm caused to the affected group. The harm may include “[e]conomic exclusion or disadvantage, [s]ocial exclusion . . . [p]sychological harms . . . [p]hysical harms . . . [or] [p]olitical exclusion”, and must be viewed in light of any systemic or historical disadvantages faced by the claimant group (Sheppard (2010), at pp. 62‑63 (emphasis deleted)).
[77] The purpose of the inquiry is to keep s. 15(1) focussed on the protection of groups that have experienced exclusionary disadvantage based on group characteristics, as well as the protection of those “who are members of more than one socially disadvantaged group in society” (Colleen Sheppard, “Grounds of Discrimination: Towards an Inclusive and Contextual Approach” (2001), 80 Can. Bar Rev. 893, at p. 896; see also Withler, at para. 58). As the Court noted in Quebec v. A when discussing the second stage of the s. 15 test:
The root of s. 15 is our awareness that certain groups have been historically discriminated against, and that the perpetuation of such discrimination should be curtailed. [para. 332]
(See also Taypotat, at para. 20.)
[78] Notably, the presence of social prejudices or stereotyping are not necessary factors in the s. 15(1) inquiry. They may assist in showing that a law has negative effects on a particular group, but they “are neither separate elements of the Andrews test, nor categories into which a claim of discrimination must fit” (Quebec v. A, at para. 329), since
[w]e must be careful not to treat Kapp and Withler as establishing an additional requirement on s. 15 claimants to prove that a distinction will perpetuate prejudicial or stereotypical attitudes towards them. Such an approach improperly focuses attention on whether a discriminatory attitude exists, not a discriminatory impact, contrary to Andrews, Kapp and Withler. [Emphasis in original; para. 327.]
(See also paras. 329-31.)
[79] The perpetuation of disadvantage, moreover, does not become less serious under s. 15(1) simply because it was relevant to a legitimate state objective. I agree with Dean Mayo Moran that adding relevance to the s. 15(1) test — even as one contextual factor among others — risks reducing the inquiry to a search for a “rational basis” for the impugned law (“Protesting Too Much: Rational Basis Review Under Canada’s Equality Guarantee”, in Sheila McIntyre and Sanda Rodgers, eds., Diminishing Returns: Inequality and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (2006), 71, at pp. 81‑84; Eberts and Stanton, at pp. 90 and 119‑20; Sheila McIntyre, “Deference and Dominance: Equality Without Substance”, in Sheila McIntyre and Sanda Rodgers, eds., Diminishing Returns: Inequality and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (2006), 95, at pp. 108‑13). The test for a prima facie breach of s. 15(1) is concerned with the discriminatory impact of legislation on disadvantaged groups, not with whether the distinction is justified, an inquiry properly left to s. 1 (Andrews, at pp. 181‑82; Turpin, at pp. 1325‑26; Miron v. Trudel, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 418, at paras. 129‑30; Eldridge, at paras. 77 and 79; Quebec v. A, at para. 333; Centrale, at para. 35).
[80] Similarly, there is no burden on a claimant to prove that the distinction is arbitrary to prove a prima facie breach of s. 15(1). It is for the government to demonstrate that the law is not arbitrary in its justificatory submissions under s. 1 (see Eberts and Stanton, at p. 117; Jonnette Watson Hamilton and Jennifer Koshan, “Kahkewistahaw First Nation v. Taypotat: An Arbitrary Approach to Discrimination” (2016), 76 S.C.L.R. (2d) 243, at pp. 259‑60; Alicja Puchta, “Quebec v A and Taypotat: Unpacking the Supreme Court’s Latest Decisions on Section 15 of the Charter ” (2018), 55 Osgoode Hall L.J. 665, at p. 704).
[81] In sum, then, the first stage of the s. 15 test is about establishing that the law imposes differential treatment based on protected grounds, either explicitly or through adverse impact. At the second stage, the Court asks whether it has the effect of reinforcing, perpetuating, or exacerbating disadvantage (Alliance, at para. 25).
[82] Where possible, the two inquiries should be kept distinct, but there is clearly potential for overlap in adverse effects cases based on “the impossibility of rigid categorizations” (Sheppard (2010), at p. 21). What matters in the end is that a court asks and answers the necessary questions relevant to the s. 15(1) inquiry, not whether it keeps the two steps of the inquiry in two impermeable silos.
Application
[83] Returning to the claim before us in this appeal, as previously noted, full‑time RCMP members who work regular hours, who are suspended, or who go on unpaid leave can obtain full pension credit for those periods of service under the pension plan. Full‑time members who temporarily reduce their hours under a job‑sharing agreement, however, are classified as part‑time workers under the Regulations and are unable to acquire full‑time pension credit for their service.
[84] Under the pension scheme, therefore, a full‑time RCMP member’s temporary reduction in working hours results in their losing out on potential pension benefits. The question is whether this arrangement has a disproportionate impact on women.
[85] The Federal Court and Court of Appeal acknowledged that the vast majority of members in the job‑sharing program who lose out on pension benefits are women with children. In their view, however, these losses occurred because “the appellants . . . elected to job‑share”, not because of their gender or parental status (C.A. reasons, at para. 53).
[86] In relying on Ms. Fraser’s “choice” to job‑share as grounds for dismissing her claim, the Federal Court and Court of Appeal, with respect, misapprehended our s. 15(1) jurisprudence. This Court has consistently held that differential treatment can be discriminatory even if it is based on choices made by the affected individual or group.
[87] In Brooks, for example, Dickson C.J. rejected an employer’s argument that providing unequal benefits to pregnant women is not sex discrimination because pregnancy is “voluntary” (pp. 1237‑38). After Brooks, the Court “repeatedly rejected arguments that choice protects a distinction from a finding of discrimination” (Quebec v. A, at para. 336). In Lavoie v. Canada, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 769, for example, the Court held that a statute which gave preferential treatment to Canadian citizens infringed s. 15(1), despite the government’s argument that becoming a Canadian citizen was a choice. Chief Justice McLachlin and Justice L’Heureux‑Dubé, concurring on this issue, made clear that
the fact that a person could avoid discrimination by modifying his or her behaviour does not negate the discriminatory effect. If it were otherwise, an employer who denied women employment in his factory on the ground that he did not wish to establish female changing facilities could contend that the real cause of the discriminatory effect is the woman’s “choice” not to use men’s changing facilities. The very act of forcing some people to make such a choice violates human dignity, and is therefore inherently discriminatory. The law of discrimination thus far has not required applicants to demonstrate that they could not have avoided the discriminatory effect in order to establish a denial of equality under s. 15(1). The Court in Andrews was not deterred by such considerations. On the contrary, La Forest J. specifically noted that acquiring Canadian citizenship could in some cases entail the “serious hardship” of losing an existing citizenship. He left no doubt that this hardship was a cost to be considered in favour of the individual affected by the discrimination. [Emphasis added; citation omitted; para. 5.]
(See also para. 51, per Bastarache J.)
[88] Justice L’Heureux‑Dubé had expressed a similar view in her dissenting reasons in Nova Scotia (Attorney General) v. Walsh, [2002] 4 S.C.R. 325, a decision the Court overturned in Quebec v. A, explaining that a choice‑based approach was fundamentally flawed:
In Walsh, the majority’s focus on choice rather than on the impact of the distinction on members of the group also paid insufficient attention to the requirement for a true substantive equality analysis, affirmed in Kapp and Withler. In contrast to formal equality, which assumes an “autonomous, self‑interested and self‑determined” individual, substantive equality looks not only at the choices that are available to individuals, but at “the social and economic environments in which [they] pla[y] out”. [Emphasis added; citation omitted; para. 342.]
[89] Several scholars have made this point as well. Prof. Margot Young, for example, points out that
th[e] closure of critical examination by way of characterization of the inequality of which an individual complains as “natural”, “chosen” or “merited” is deeply problematic. Indeed, many of the major steps in the progression towards women’s equality have come precisely from the revelation of the “natural” as “social”, the “chosen” as “coerced” and the “merited” as “undeserved”.
. . .
Claims of merit, nature and choice are difficult to critically unpack; they so often are the roots of discrimination. This makes these notions deeply functional in the perpetuation and obfuscation of inequality.
(“Blissed Out: Section 15 at Twenty”, in Sheila McIntyre and Sanda Rodgers, eds., Diminishing Returns: Inequality and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (2006), 45, at pp. 55-56; see also Margot Young, “Unequal to the Task: ‘Kapp’ing the Substantive Potential of Section 15” (2010), 50 S.C.L.R. (2d) 183, at pp. 190‑91 and 196.)
[90] Prof. Sonia Lawrence makes the critical point that choices are themselves shaped by systemic inequality:
. . . a contextual account of choice produces a sadly impoverished narrative, in which choices more theoretical than real serve to eliminate the possibility of a finding of discrimination . . . . The result is a jurisprudence which almost mocks a more nuanced version of the what and how of discrimination, through frequent recourse to the idea that any harm to the claimant was actually the result of her choice, or her unwise exercise of her own judicially protected liberty.
. . .
Any number of structural conditions push people towards their choices, with the result that certain choices may be made more often by people with particular “personal characteristics”. This is a key feature of systemic inequality — it develops not out of direct statutory discrimination, but rather out of the operation of institutions which may seem neutral at first glance. [Emphasis added.]
(“Choice, Equality and Tales of Racial Discrimination: Reading the Supreme Court on Section 15”, in Sheila McIntyre and Sanda Rodgers, eds., Diminishing Returns: Inequality and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (2006), 115, at pp. 115‑16 and 124‑25; see also Diana Majury, “Women Are Themselves to Blame: Choice as a Justification for Unequal Treatment”, in Fay Faraday, Margaret Denike and M. Kate Stephenson, eds., Making Equality Rights Real: Securing Substantive Equality under the Charter (2006), 209, at pp. 219‑25.)
[91] The case before us highlights the flaws of over‑emphasizing choice in the s. 15 inquiry. For many women, the decision to work on a part‑time basis, far from being an unencumbered choice, “often lies beyond the individual’s effective control” (Miron, at para. 153; Quebec v. A, at para. 316; see also Watson Hamilton and Koshan (2015), at p. 202). Deciding to work part‑time, for many women, is a “choice” between either staying above or below the poverty line. The job-sharing program, moreover, was introduced precisely because some members required access to an alternative to taking leave without pay “due to [their] personal or family circumstances” (Appeal Record, vol. V, at p. 810). Ms. Fox made a similar point in her affidavit:
In my experience, this policy is particularly harmful to women who work in rural or isolated communities. The RCMP regularly posts women members in such communities where there is simply no around‑the‑clock child care available. As such, job‑sharing is often the only child care solution for members with children.
[92] By invoking the “choice” to job‑share as a basis for rejecting the s. 15(1) claim, the Federal Court and Court of Appeal removed the “challenged inequality from scrutiny, effectively taking it off the radar screen so as to circumvent examination of the equality issues at stake” (Majury, at p. 219). It is an approach that this Court’s s. 15 jurisprudence eschews.
[93] The Federal Court and Court of Appeal also held that the pension plan does not treat those who job‑share less favourably than those who go on unpaid leave. They reached this conclusion based on a formalistic comparison between the remuneration offered under job‑sharing and leave without pay.
[94] This is precisely the type of “mirror comparator group” analysis that this Court squarely rejected in Withler (paras. 55‑64; see also Moore, at paras. 28‑31). Section 15(1) guarantees Ms. Fraser and others in the job‑sharing program the right to substantive equality with respect to full‑time RCMP workers, not merely members on leave without pay. A narrow focus on the buy‑back provisions ignores their role within the pension scheme: they are themselves the means by which those who go on unpaid leave “get meaningful access” to the pension benefits available to all full‑time employees (Moore, at para. 28).
[95] This aspect of Ms. Fraser’s claim is indistinguishable from Centrale. In that case, Quebec delayed implementation of a pay equity program by up to four years for women employed in workplaces with male comparators, and six years for women employed in workplaces with no male comparators. This Court held that the implementation delay infringed s. 15(1). Rather than comparing the situation of women in different workplaces, the Court explained how the delay in implementing pay equity disadvantaged women relative to men in other workplaces earning full value for their work:
The legislature chose to act to address pay discrimination against women, but denied access by delaying it for a group of women, leaving them, in comparison to male workers, paid less for longer. Whatever the motives behind the decision, this is “discrimination reinforced by law”, which this Court has denounced since Andrews (p. 172). The fact, then, that women in one type of workplace — with male comparators — received a remedy promptly is not an answer to the question of whether women in another type of workplace were also disadvantaged. It is no defence to a claim of discrimination by one group of women to suggest that another group has had its particular discrimination addressed. [Emphasis added; para. 33.]
(See also paras. 29, per Abella J., and 155-56, per McLachlin C.J., concurring on this point.)
[96] This leaves the question of whether, under a proper assessment, the s. 15(1) claim should succeed.
[97] In my respectful view, the use of an RCMP member’s temporary reduction in working hours as a basis to impose less favourable pension consequences plainly has a disproportionate impact on women. The relevant evidence — the results of the system — showed that:
• RCMP members who worked reduced hours in the job‑sharing program were predominantly women with young children.
• From 2010‑2014, 100 percent of members working reduced hours through job‑sharing were women, and most of them cited childcare as their reason for doing so.
[98] These statistics were bolstered by compelling evidence about the disadvantages women face as a group in balancing professional and domestic work. Evidence submitted by Ms. Fraser indicated that women have historically borne the overwhelming share of childcare responsibilities, that part‑time workers in Canada are disproportionately women, and that they are far more likely than men to work part‑time due to child care responsibilities. As a result, they experience less stable employment and periods of “scaling back at work”, including within police services.
[99] This evidence finds firm support in commission reports, judicial decisions and academic work. The landmark Report of the Royal Commission on the Status of Women in Canada (Florence Bird, chair) acknowledged that a “larger proportion of women work[ed] only part-time” (at p. 61) and warned that the inequitable treatment of part‑time workers would disadvantage women:
We recognize one major problem in the use of part‑time workers: the provision of fringe benefits for those not employed on a regular basis. We nevertheless believe that ways must be found to provide these employees with pay and working conditions no less equitable than those provided for the full‑time worker. [p. 105]
[100] In its report, the Commission of Inquiry into Part‑time Work (1983, Joan Wallace, comm.) confirmed that most employees in part-time, lower-paid positions were women (Part-time Work in Canada: Report of the Commission of Inquiry into Part-time Work (1983), at pp. 21‑22, 46 and 151). The Commission also studied the use of job‑sharing programs across Canada. The data it collected suggested that almost all job‑sharing participants were women, and that “[t]he arrival of a new baby was the most common primary reason for initiating job sharing” (pp. 177‑78).
[101] The Report of the Commission on Equality in Employment (1984, Rosalie Silberman Abella, comm.) expanded on the link between part‑time work and childcare, observing that
[t]he demand and the need for remedial measures derive from the increasing number of mothers in the workforce. Their children need adequate care. By Canadian law both parents have a duty to care for their children, but by custom this responsibility has consistently fallen to the mother. It is the mother, therefore, who bears any guilt or social disapprobation for joining the workforce. And it is the mother who normally bears the psychological and actual responsibility for making childcare arrangements.
. . .
From the point of view of mothers, access to childcare and the nature of such care limits employment options. “In balancing the responsibilities of family and career, women more frequently than men must make decisions (such as to withdraw from the labour force to care for young children) of consequence to their career” . . . . Various studies show that a major reason women are over‑represented in part‑time work is that they are combining childcare responsibilities with jobs in the paid labour market. [Emphasis added.]
(pp. 177 and 185-86, quoting Ontario Manpower Commission, The Employment of Women in Ontario: Background Paper (1983), at p. 17)
[102] The final report of the Law Commission of Ontario’s 2012 study on vulnerable workers also confirmed that
Canadian studies show that women are more likely to be engaged in precarious work than men. For example, women are over‑represented in part‑time and temporary work.
. . .
The high numbers of women in precarious work are, in some measure, the result of their traditional social role as caregivers. Under the “gender contract” that typified the 1950s middle class, men were primarily responsible for financial support and women stayed home to care for the family. (Women in many working‑class families have always worked outside the home, caring for other women’s children, cleaning homes and working in factories and shops, for example.) Today, under current social and economic conditions, two incomes are often necessary to support a family and women’s choices and involvement in many spheres of life have expanded. The majority of women have joined the workforce. The family unit is also more varied with increasing numbers of single parents. And yet women continue to bear primary responsibility for care‑giving. In 2010 Canadian women spent an average total of 50 hours per week caring for household children, double that spent by men (24 hours). In 2008, just over 9 percent of women reported working part‑time because of childcare responsibilities as compared to less than 1 percent of men. As a result, the precarity of women’s jobs is partly influenced by public policy on maternity benefits and childcare. [Emphasis added.]
(Vulnerable Workers and Precarious Work, at pp. 19‑20; see also Statistics Canada, Women in Canada: A Gender‑based Statistical Report (7th ed. 2017).)
[103] Judgments of this Court have also recognized that women face disadvantages in the workplace because of their largely singular responsibility for domestic work. The Court has acknowledged the sacrifices women make at work “for the sake of domestic considerations” (Moge v. Moge, [1992] 3 S.C.R. 813, at p. 861; New Brunswick (Minister of Health and Community Services) v. G. (J.), [1999] 3 S.C.R. 46, at para. 113, per L’Heureux‑Dubé J., concurring); and that “women bear a disproportionate share of the child care burden in Canada” (Symes v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 695, at pp. 762‑63; see also Young v. Young, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 3, at pp. 49‑50, per L’Heureux‑Dubé J., dissenting).
[104] Recognizing the reality of gender divisions in domestic labour and their impact on women’s working lives is neither new nor disputable (see Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, U.N. Doc. A/CONF.177/20, October 17, 1995, at paras. 155‑56 and 158). Elizabeth Shilton has eloquently described the link between the division of unpaid care work and women’s over‑representation in part-time work:
In twenty‑first‑century Canada, the male breadwinner family has largely vanished along with the idea of the “family wage”; women are almost as likely as men to belong to the paid workforce. Two constants remain, however. Employers continue to demand an “unencumbered worker,” along with the right to organize work without regard to workers’ care obligations. And gender roles within families have been slow to change. Care work still needs to be done, and women still bear most of the practical responsibility for doing it. In consequence, women are forced to manage family care without impinging on their work obligations. Their strategies — euphemistically labelled “choices” — often include part‑time and precarious forms of work that typically come with lower wages, fewer benefits, fewer promotional opportunities, and minimal or no retirement pensions. The impact on women’s economic welfare is compounded by stereotypical assumptions that women do not merit or want more responsible, higher‑paying jobs because they will inevitably prioritize family over work. The unequal burden of family care creates and reinforces women’s continuing inequality both inside and outside the workplace. [Emphasis added.]
(“Family Status Discrimination: ‘Disruption and Great Mischief’ or Bridge over the Work‑Family Divide?” (2018), 14 J.L. & Equality 33, at p. 35; see also Sheppard (2010), at p. 26; Richard P. Chaykowski and Lisa M. Powell, “Women and the Labour Market: Recent Trends and Policy Issues” (1999), 25 Can. Pub. Pol’y S1; Braun, at pp. 137‑38; Fredman (2011), at pp. 38, 45 and 181; Rivet and Santorineos, at p. 373; Suzi Macpherson, “Reconciling employment and family care-giving: a gender analysis of current challenges and future directions for UK policy”, in Nicole Busby and Grace James, eds., Families, Care‑giving and Paid Work: Challenging Labour Law in the 21st Century (2011), 13, at pp. 13‑30; Susan Bisom‑Rapp, “What We Know About Equal Employment Opportunity Law After Fifty Years of Trying” (2018), 22 Employee Rts. & Employment Pol’y J. 337, at pp. 348‑49.)
[105] Courts, by identifying adverse impact discrimination, have “been particularly effective in dealing with criteria which specifically disadvantage women with childcare responsibilities” (Fredman (2011), at p. 181). The European Court of Justice, for example, has held that providing workers with less favourable benefits based on their working hours can amount to adverse impact discrimination against women (see Jenkins v. Kingsgate (Clothing Productions) Ltd, C-96/80, [1981] E.C.R. I-911; Bilka‑Kaufhaus GmbH v. Weber von Hartz, C-170/84, [1986] E.C.R. I-1607; Rinner‑Kühn v. FWW Spezial‑Gebäudereinigung GmbH, C-171/88, [1989] E.C.R. I‑2743; Vroege v. NCIV Instituut voor Volkshuisvesting BV, C-57/93, [1994] E.C.R I‑4541; Schönheit v. Stadt Frankfurt am Main, C-4/02 and C-5/02, [2003] E.C.R. I‑12575; see also Reg. v. Secretary of State for Employment, Ex parte Equal Opportunities Commission, [1995] 1 A.C. 1 (H.L.); Braun, at pp. 137‑40).
[106] All of these sources — and more — show the clear association between gender and fewer or less stable working hours. They provide powerful support for Ms. Fraser’s core argument: that the RCMP’s use of a temporary reduction in working hours as a basis for imposing less favourable pension consequences has an adverse impact on women. The first part of the s. 15(1) test has therefore been met.
[107] This leads me to the second part of the s. 15(1) inquiry: whether this adverse impact reinforces, exacerbates or perpetuates disadvantage.
[108] There is no doubt that it does. I agree with Ms. Fraser that the negative pension consequences of job‑sharing perpetuate a long‑standing source of disadvantage to women: gender biases within pension plans, which have historically been designed “for middle and upper‑income full‑time employees with long service, typically male” (Report of the Royal Commission on the Status of Pensions in Ontario (1980), at p. 116).
[109] The National Action Committee on the Status of Women (“NAC”) expressed concerns about gender biases within pension plans in a brief to the House of Commons Sub‑Committee on Equality Rights (presented in June 1985 by Louise Dulude and Carole Wallace). In the brief, the NAC described how pension plans treat women unequally:
The differences in impact of pensions on women and men are well known and amply documented. They are the results of the combined effects of the elements which make up the multilayered cake that is Canada’s pension system today.
. . .
Women are more affected by these inadequacies than men because they have a higher rate of turnover and drop out of the labour force more often than their male counterparts. As a result, the small proportion of female earners who are members of employer pension plans are exceedingly unlikely to ever collect decent pensions from that source. In fact, experts have said that many women who participate in employer‑sponsored pension plans would probably have been better off putting their contributions to them in a bank.
(Brief on Equality for Women in Pensions, Taxation and Federal Benefits to Parents, at pp. 2 and 8-9)
[110] Others have echoed these concerns. Elizabeth Shilton notes that although progress has been made in securing equal pension coverage for women, the level of benefits they derive from those pensions remains unequal (“Gender Risk and Employment Pension Plans in Canada” (2013), 17 C.L.E.L.J. 101, at pp. 110‑12). She links the gender biases in pension plans to their preference for “male pattern employment”:
From the beginning, pension plans were calibrated to the career trajectories of skilled workers whose training and experience were particularly valuable to their employers. The reward structures embedded in those plans therefore favoured permanent, full‑time workers with long service and relatively high pay — what has been called “male pattern employment.” Long after explicitly gendered pension plan rules were made illegal, typical benefit structures still forced lower‑paid, temporary or part‑time employees — those in typical “female pattern employment” — to subsidize the benefits of workers with more market power. This is true of all pension plans, although the way in which the gender dynamic works depends on the type of plan. [p. 112]
[111] The International Labour Organization has also commented on how increased periods of part‑time work result in lower pension benefits for women:
Throughout their life cycles, women accumulate disadvantages that pile up at older ages. Double or triple discrimination is often amplified as women advance in age. Women are especially vulnerable owing to their high numbers in unpaid, low‑paid, part‑time, frequently interrupted, or informal economy work. As a result they are less often entitled to any contributory pension benefits in their own right. Even if they are, their pensions are often significantly lower than those of men due to lower earnings and shorter contribution periods.
(Rights, jobs and social security: New visions for older women and men (2008))
[112] The structural inequality within pension plans has tangible impacts for women upon retirement. This Court has described the “feminization of poverty” as an “entrenched social phenomenon” in Canada (Moge, at p. 853). Claire Young has linked this problem to disparities in pension policies:
. . . when one examines statistics on income security in retirement, women are disproportionately worse off financially than men, with 7.6 percent of women having incomes below the low income cut off (LICO), which is colloquially called the poverty line, compared to 3.6 percent of elderly men . . . . [C]urrent Canadian pension policies are a major contributing factor to this income disparity.
. . .
. . . over 72 percent of those aged sixty‑five or older living below the poverty line are women. It is also important to note that single elderly women are the poorest of the poor in Canada, with 80 percent of unattached women over the age of sixty‑five living in poverty. [Emphasis added.]
(“Pensions, Privatization, and Poverty: The Gendered Impact” (2011), 23 C.J.W.L. 661, at pp. 663 and 665; see also Shilton (2013), at pp. 102‑3; Commission of Inquiry into Part-time Work, at p. 151; Gender Wage Gap Strategy Steering Committee, Final Report and Recommendations of the Gender Wage Gap Strategy Steering Committee (2016), at pp. 18 and 60‑61; Fredman (2011), at pp. 47‑48; Susan Bisom‑Rapp and Malcolm Sargeant, “It’s Complicated: Age, Gender, and Lifetime Discrimination Against Working Women — The United States and the U.K. as Examples” (2014), 22 Elder L.J. 1, at p. 99.)
[113] Pension design choices have, in sum, “far‑reaching normative, political and tangible economic implications for women” (Shilton (2013), at p. 140, quoting Bernd Marin, “Gender Equality, Neutrality, Specificity and Sensitivity — and the Ambivalence of Benevolent Welfare Paternalism”, in Bernd Marin and Eszter Zólyomi, eds., Women’s Work and Pensions: What is Good, What is Best? Designing Gender-Sensitive Arrangements (2010), 203, at p. 210). Because the RCMP’s design perpetuates a long‑standing source of economic disadvantage for women, the second stage of the s. 15(1) test is satisfied and there is a prima facie breach of s. 15 based on the enumerated ground of sex.
[114] In light of the conclusion that there is a prima facie breach of s. 15(1) based on sex, it is unnecessary to decide whether Ms. Fraser’s alternative argument that this Court recognize parental/family status as an analogous ground should succeed.[6] Some observations may be helpful, however, for future cases.
[115] The Attorney General was prepared to accept that the narrower ground of “parental” status should be recognized as an analogous ground under s. 15(1), but only for these proceedings. I am uncomfortable with this Court accepting a new analogous ground as a one‑off. It is either a sustainable legal principle that this Court should accept or it is not. It should not get a trial run subject to periodic review. Moreover, where it is protected in human rights statutes in Canada, parental status is part of family status, not a distinct category. I would be reluctant to sever them without submissions on what the implications are.
[116] In my respectful view, this is not the right case to resolve whether family/parental status should be recognized as an analogous ground under s. 15(1). Not only is recognizing a new analogous ground unnecessary to fully and fairly resolve Ms. Fraser’s discrimination claim, a robust intersectional analysis of gender and parenting — as this case shows — can be carried out under the enumerated ground of sex, by acknowledging that the uneven division of childcare responsibilities is one of the “persistent systemic disadvantages [that] have operated to limit the opportunities available” to women in Canadian society (Taypotat, at para. 17; see also Withler, at para. 43; Quebec v. A, at paras. 327‑32; Alliance, at para. 28; Centrale, at para. 35). Human rights cases in other jurisdictions confirm that claims of parental discrimination can be brought as claims of adverse impact discrimination on the basis of sex (see Fredman (2011), at pp. 181‑82; Shilton (2018), at p. 36; London Underground Ltd. v. Edwards (No. 2), [1999] I.C.R. 494 (E.W.C.A.); Phillips v. Martin Marietta Corp., 400 U.S. 542 (1971); Bostock v. Clayton County, Georgia, 140 S. Ct. 1731 (2020), at p. 1743).
[117] There is another more compelling basis for not definitively resolving the issue in this appeal: the record and submissions before us do not provide the necessary assistance in exploring the implications of such a step. There are several complex questions about recognizing family/parental status as an analogous ground that have not been addressed at any stage of these proceedings. There was only a brief discussion of family/parental status in Ms. Fraser’s factum, the issue was largely unaddressed in the submissions of the Attorney General, almost all the interveners and during oral argument,[7] and it was completely absent in the reasons of the Federal Court and Court of Appeal.
[118] The parties recognized that family status is a protected ground in most provincial human rights statutes, and that while there is no separate express protection for parental status, family status has been defined or interpreted to include protection for parents (British Columbia Law Institute, Human Rights and Family Responsibilities: Family Status Discrimination under Human Rights Law in British Columbia and Canada (2012), at p. 26). The question of what constitutes a prima facie case of family status discrimination has been the source of considerable “uncertainty and controversy” in the human rights arena (British Columbia Law Institute, at p. 10; see Ontario Human Rights Commission, The Cost of Caring: Report on the Consultation on Discrimination on the Basis of Family Status (2006), at p. 4; Campbell River & North Island Transition Society v. Health Sciences Assn. of British Columbia (2004), 28 B.C.L.R. (4th) 292 (C.A.); Brown v. Department of National Revenue (1993), 93 CLLC ¶17,013 (C.H.R.T); Canada (Attorney General) v. Johnstone, [2015] 2 F.C.R. 595 (C.A.); Misetich v. Value Village Stores Inc. (2016), 39 C.C.E.L (4th) 129 (Ont. H.R.T.), at paras. 35-48; see also Shilton (2018); Sheila Osborne‑Brown, “Discrimination and Family Status: The Test, the Continuing Debate, and the Accommodation Conversation” (2018), 14 J.L. & Equality 87; Lyle Kanee and Adam Cembrowski, “Family Status Discrimination and the Obligation to Self‑Accommodate” (2018), 14 J.L. & Equality 61).
[119] But there were almost no submissions before us about whether or how the unsettled state of the human rights jurisprudence does or should affect the recognition of family/parental status under the Charter , about the definition or possible scope of “family” or “parental” status, or about the possibility of addressing parental or family status discrimination by recognizing other grounds (see Thibaudeau v. Canada, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 627, at pp. 722‑25, per McLachlin J., dissenting (“separated or divorced custodial parent”); Canada (Attorney General) v. Lesiuk (C.A.), [2003] 2 F.C. 697, at para. 37 (“women in a parental status”)).
[120] Nor did we receive any submissions or evidence on how or whether recognition of family/parental status would affect protection for women above and beyond that available under the enumerated ground of sex. The record is similarly silent on the nature of the disadvantages that fathers may have experienced or continue to experience because of parenting responsibilities, or on the possible impact of recognizing a new analogous ground on fathers’ relationships with a co‑parent.
[121] And finally, we received no submissions on whether or how these questions are or should be relevant to the test for recognizing a new analogous ground under s. 15(1), a test which has itself been the subject of renewed scholarly attention (see Joshua Sealy‑Harrington, “Assessing Analogous Grounds: The Doctrinal and Normative Superiority of a Multi‑Variable Approach” (2013), 10 J.L. & Equality 37; Jessica Eisen, “Grounding Equality in Social Relations: Suspect Classification, Analogous Grounds and Relational Theory” (2017), 42 Queen’s L.J. 41).
[122] These are some of the issues that merit close examination by this Court, as do issues like the “growing and urgent need related to eldercare” (Ontario Human Rights Commission, at p. 12), and the implications of our evolutionary understanding from a conjugal‑centric meaning of “family”, to one more appreciative of the variations in intimate relationships that make up today’s households (see Elaine Craig, “Family as Status in Doe v. Canada: Constituting Family Under Section 15 of the Charter ” (2007), 20 N.J.C.L. 197, at pp. 207‑208). But these issues were barely addressed in this appeal.
[123] While recognizing multiple, interactive grounds of discrimination can allow for a fuller appreciation of the discrimination involved in particular cases, the gap in submissions and evidence means that critical questions about the implications of adopting family/parental status as an analogous ground were not explored in the record. That is not to say that this status should not eventually be recognized as an analogous ground, or that we should shy away from recognizing analogous grounds which raise complexities — rarely do enumerated or analogous grounds come neatly packaged — but before we do so, it seems to me to be wiser to have the benefit of sufficient argument and submissions so that the recognition, when it comes, pays full tribute to the breadth of what is at stake.
[124] And so to s. 1.
[125] Section 1 allows the state to justify a limit on a Charter right as “demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society”. To start, the state must identify a pressing and substantial objective for limiting the Charter right (R. v. Oakes, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 103, at pp. 138‑39). The Attorney General bears the burden of showing that classifying full‑time RCMP members who enter job‑sharing as part‑time workers and excluding them from accessing full‑time pension credit, achieves a compelling state objective. As the Court noted in Alliance, it is the limitation on equality rights that must be justified, not the legislative scheme as a whole:
Where a court finds that a specific legislative provision infringes a Charter right, the state’s burden is to justify that limitation, not the whole legislative scheme. Thus, the “objective relevant to the s. 1 analysis is the objective of the infringing measure, since it is the infringing measure and nothing else which is sought to be justified” (RJR‑MacDonald Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General), [1995] 3 S.C.R. 199, at para. 144; R. v. K.R.J., [2016] 1 S.C.R. 906, at para. 62). [Emphasis in original; para. 45.]
[126] The Attorney General, in my respectful view, has identified no pressing and substantial policy concern, purpose or principle that explains why job‑sharers should not be granted full‑time pension credit for their service. On the contrary, this limitation is entirely detached from the purposes of both the job‑sharing scheme and the buy‑back provisions, which were intended to ameliorate the position of female RCMP members who take leave to care for their children. As the Hon. Gilles Loiselle, then President of the Treasury Board, said in support of amendments to the public service superannuation legislation:
I might mention too that this provision, like that for coverage of part‑time employees, would particularly benefit women who continue to be the employees with the greatest need for room to balance family and career commitments. Many women, for example, take advantage of extended periods of leave without pay for the purpose of caring for young children or for elders, and this provision would enhance their ability to return to work without undue financial hardship. [Emphasis added.]
(House of Commons Debates, vol. VI, 3rd Sess., 34th Parl., February 24, 1992, at p. 7487)
[127] The job‑sharing program had a similar objective, as confirmed in an affidavit filed as part of the Attorney General’s record for the application hearing:
The job-sharing policy was instituted to facilitate work‑life balance for members of the Force who, due to personal or family circumstances, would benefit from being able to work part‑time instead of taking extended leaves of absence in the form of LWOP. Job‑sharing was thus seen as being mutually beneficial as it enabled members to remain operationally connected to the Force while having a work schedule that better accommodated their individual circumstances. [Emphasis added.]
(Appeal Record, vol. V, at p. 810)
[128] Job‑sharing was clearly intended as a substitute for leave without pay for those members who could not take such leave “due to personal or family circumstances”. It is unclear, then, what purpose is served by treating the two forms of work reduction differently when extending pension buy‑back rights. The RCMP’s plan provides buy‑back rights when a full‑time member reduces her hours from 40 to 0 to care for her child, but, inexplicably, withholds such rights if the same member for the same reasons reduces her hours from 40 to 10, 20, 30 or some other number. And this despite the RCMP benefitting from the member’s services in the latter scenario. I see no justification for this limitation, let alone a pressing and substantial one. The distinction becomes even more difficult to understand when considering that buy-back rights are available to members who have been suspended.
[129] In my respectful view, therefore, the government has not offered a compelling objective for the limitation on job‑sharing participants wishing to buy back full‑time pension credit.
[130] Since the prima facie breach cannot be justified under s. 1, it is a violation of s. 15 to preclude Ms. Fraser and her colleagues from buying back their pension credits.
[131] Finally, my colleagues’ reasons call for response.
[132] The version of s. 15(1) advanced in my colleagues’ reasons is essentially that advanced in the dissenting reasons in Alliance. They argued then, as they do now, that a finding of a breach would have a “chilling effect” on legislatures;[8] that the impugned legislation was not “the source of the differences in compensation between men and women” (at para. 97);[9] that the Court should not interfere with “incremental” efforts intended to narrow the gap between a group and the rest of society;[10] and that finding a s. 15(1) breach would place legislatures under a freestanding positive obligation “to act in order to obtain specific societal results such as the total and definitive eradication of gender-based pay inequities” (para. 65).[11]
[133] All of these propositions were squarely rejected by the majority in Alliance. Nothing, as far as I can see, has happened since Alliance was decided in 2018 to justify discarding its premises. And no one involved in this case argued that we should, except, inferentially, my colleagues, who tug at the strands of a prior decision they disagree with in search of the occasional phrase or paragraph by which they can unravel the precedent. Their arguments are based on conjecture not reality, calling to mind one writer’s wry observation that “setting straw men on fire is not what we mean by illumination”.[12]
[134] And, above all, they continue their insistent attack on the foundational premise of this Court’s s. 15 jurisprudence — substantive equality — in favour of a formalistic approach that embraces “a mechanical and sterile categorization process conducted entirely within the four corners of the impugned legislation” (Turpin, at p. 1332). This Court has consistently rejected this “thin and impoverished vision of s. 15(1)” (Eldridge, at para. 73), as have even the scholars cited by my colleagues.[13] It is unfortunate that as the global jurisprudence has increasingly embraced substantive equality, my colleagues continue to endorse an approach which evokes the rejected pre‑Charter theory whose effect was to deny access to benefits when that access required accommodation based on difference.
[135] Whatever my colleagues’ definition of “rule of law” is, it must surely include the assumption that decisions of the Supreme Court will be respected not only by the public, but by members of the Court. And it must surely also include an assurance to those seeking constitutional protections that the ongoing repetition in dissenting reasons of rejected arguments will not require them “with each new case, [to] stand ready to defend the exact gains that have been won multiple times in the past” (Faraday, at p. 330; see also Jonnette Watson Hamilton and Jennifer Koshan, “Equality Rights and Pay Equity: Déjà Vu in the Supreme Court of Canada” (2019), 15 J.L. & Equality 1).
[136] For over 30 years, the s. 15 inquiry has involved identifying the presence, persistence and pervasiveness of disadvantage, based on enumerated or analogous grounds. Its mandate is ambitious but not utopian: to address that disadvantage where it is identified so that in the pursuit of equality, inequality can be reduced one case at a time. That is why there is a s. 15(1) breach in this case — not because women continue to have disproportionate responsibility for childcare and less stable working hours than men, but because the pension plan “institutionalize[s] those traits as a basis on which to unequally distribute” pension benefits to job‑sharing participants (see Faraday, at p. 318). This is ‘“discrimination reinforced by law’, which this Court has denounced since Andrews” (Centrale, at para. 33, quoting Andrews, at p. 172). Contrary to the views of my colleagues, there is nothing “extraordinary” about holding, as we do here, that such discrimination violates s. 15(1) of the Charter . Based on our jurisprudence, it would be extraordinary if we did not.
[137] The final question relates to remedy.
[138] In my view, the appropriate remedy is a declaration that there has been a breach of the s. 15(1) rights of full‑time RCMP members who temporarily reduced their working hours under a job‑sharing agreement, based on the inability of those members to buy back full pension credit for that service. The methodology for facilitating the buy‑back of pension credit is for the government to develop, but any remedial measures it takes should be in accordance with this Court’s reasons. They should also have retroactive effect in order to give the claimants in this case and others in their position a meaningful remedy (Vancouver (City) v. Ward, [2010] 2 S.C.R. 28, at para. 20; Doucet‑Boudreau v. Nova Scotia (Minister of Education), [2003] 3 S.C.R. 3, at paras. 55‑58).
[139] I would allow the appeal with costs throughout.
The following are the reasons delivered by
Brown and Rowe JJ. —
I. Introduction
[140] At one level, this appeal presents the simple question: is tying pension benefits to hours worked discriminatory? The Royal Canadian Mounted Police (“RCMP”) allows two or more of its regular members (“members”) to share one full‑time position through the option of “job‑sharing.” The pension benefits of members who job‑share, like all other members, are determined through the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Act , R.S.C. 1985, c. R‑11 and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Regulations, C.R.C., c. 1393 (collectively, the “Plan”). Under the Plan, the pension benefits of members who job‑share are prorated to reflect the hours they worked during the job‑sharing period.
[141] In addition to job‑sharing, the RCMP has also given its members the option of taking leave without pay (“LWOP”). These members may “buy back” pension benefits when they return to work from an extended period of LWOP.
[142] Through its job‑sharing policy and the LWOP provisions, the RCMP has sought to provide flexible working arrangements in recognition of the burden women face in pursuing a career due to the unequal distribution of childcare responsibilities in society. For members with childcare responsibilities, job‑sharing accommodates those who are able to remain operationally connected to the force and want to keep their policing skills up to date, while LWOP accommodates those who temporarily leave the force by enhancing their ability to return to work without undue financial hardship. The Plan and the RCMP’s policy on job‑sharing are not anathema to the vision of equality that underlies s. 15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , but instead represent an attempt to accommodate employees in light of their particular circumstances.
[143] And yet, our colleague Abella J. finds these aspects of the Plan to be unconstitutional. She describes the historical disadvantages women have faced in the workplace and then concludes, in effect, that the Plan does not do enough to remedy these disadvantages. One may reach this conclusion as a matter of policy, but that is not the question to be decided. Rather, and at its most fundamental level, it is whether, as a matter of law, the Constitution empowers (or even requires) the courts to substitute their views as to how to remedy those disadvantages for those of the legislature and the executive.
[144] The circumstances here are extraordinary, in that it is acknowledged that Parliament was not obliged to enact the Plan (see, e.g., transcript, at p. 66), nor is it barred from repealing it (see Quebec (Attorney General) v. Canada (Attorney General), 2015 SCC 14, [2015] 1 S.C.R. 693, at para. 25; Quebec (Attorney General) v. Alliance du personnel professionnel et technique de la santé et des services sociaux, 2018 SCC 17, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 464, at para. 33). But is not the next extension of our colleague’s line of reasoning that governments (federal and provincial) have a positive duty under s. 15(1) to initiate measures that will remove all effects of historic disadvantage, and that they are constitutionally barred from repealing or even amending such measures? These are profoundly complex matters of public policy that no Canadian court is institutionally competent to deal with.
[145] Our colleague’s line of reasoning in this case lays the groundwork for just that position. Among other things, it effectively overrules this Court’s recent statement in Alliance that the state may “act incrementally in addressing systemic equality” (para. 42 (emphasis added)). That the Plan does not eradicate disadvantage should not mean that it should attract censure as “discriminatory.” Rather, considered in its entirety and with proper attention to its object, the Plan is a package of benefits designed to balance the needs of some RCMP employees during their child‑raising years, prorated according to hours worked. On any permutation of s. 15(1), its effect surely cannot be to hinder government efforts to address pre‑existing inequality.
[146] This leads to a more fundamental concern presented by this appeal — a concern which, we observe, has been repeatedly made by legal commentators, but which has yet to be taken up by this Court. The gauge of “substantive equality” by which this Court has measured s. 15(1) claims of right, not having been defined (except by reference to what it is not — e.g. “formal equality”), has become an open‑ended and undisciplined rhetorical device by which courts may privilege, without making explicit, their own policy preferences. As we explain below, and with respect, this case is an instance of that inherent malleability being deployed so as to strike down a scheme which was, after all, designed to be ameliorative.
[147] The impugned provisions of the Plan are not unconstitutional. For the reasons that follow, we would dismiss the appeal.
II. Facts
[148] While we agree generally with the facts as recounted by our colleague, we would add some observations regarding the appellants’ employment status. Further, her description of the Plan obscures some key aspects of how it functions. This is not a small matter: understanding the Plan and the underlying legislative scheme in its entirety is key to adjudicating the s. 15 claim. As this Court has explained:
Where . . . the impugned distinction is the denial of a benefit that is part of a statutory benefit scheme that applies to a large number of people, the discrimination assessment must focus on the object of the measure alleged to be discriminatory in the context of the broader legislative scheme, taking into account the universe of potential beneficiaries. [Emphasis added.]
(Withler v. Canada (Attorney General), 2011 SCC 12, [2011] 1 S.C.R. 396, at para. 3)
A. The Appellants’ Employment Status
[149] Our colleague does not directly engage with the appellants’ employment status. At para. 21, she notes that the appellants argued that “the pension plan, properly interpreted, allows participants in the job‑sharing program to acquire full pension credit.” This passage refers to an issue before the Federal Court: the appellants argued that job‑sharers were “presumptively” full‑time members who agreed to work temporarily reduced hours or that they worked full‑time with periods of LWOP (2017 FC 557, at paras. 43‑44 (CanLII)). This argument was also advanced before this Court. And, having considered this issue in detail, the Federal Court found that the appellants worked part‑time while job‑sharing (para. 47). This finding was based on a thorough review of the record, including the 1997 Bulletin that introduced job‑sharing, the RCMP Administration Manual II.10, and the appellants’ Memoranda of Agreement (paras. 48‑53). We highlight that the Manual explicitly states that “[j]ob sharing is considered as part‑time employment” (A.R., vol. II, at p. 238 (emphasis added)). Further, the Federal Court expressly rejected the arguments that job‑sharers were partly on LWOP (at para. 55) or worked full‑time with temporarily reduced hours (para. 56). The Federal Court of Appeal upheld these findings, noting that the Federal Court’s conclusions on this point were “largely factual” (2018 FCA 223, [2019] 2 F.C.R. 541, at para. 33). Applying a standard of palpable and overriding error, it found no basis to interfere (paras. 33‑36).
[150] Despite this, our colleague repeatedly refers to job‑sharers as “full‑time members who temporarily reduced their working hours” (at para. 3; see also paras. 83, 97 and 138) or “full‑time RCMP members who job‑share” (paras. 5 and 25). She therefore seems to overturn this finding without setting out the applicable standard or explaining the error.
[151] This finding is key to the rest of our colleague’s decision. By treating job‑sharers as full‑time employees, she is able to say they are entitled to the same pension benefits as full‑time employees. With respect, this approach skates over key aspects of the Plan, most notably how it treats part‑time members and the different situations in which members take LWOP. In other words, our colleague does not account for the context of the entire scheme, which she must do in order to be faithful to Withler.
B. The Operation of the Plan
[152] At the outset, it is important to note that the appellants do not allege that it is unfair in general for members who work part‑time to have their pensions adjusted for periods of part‑time work. Rather, the core of their argument is that they should be able to “buy back” pensionable service in the same way as members who take LWOP, a submission we dismiss below. To properly assess this submission, it is crucial to understand how the Plan operates and, in particular, how it applies in the same manner to full‑time and part‑time members except to make adjustments to account for hours actually worked.
[153] The Plan is a “contributory defined benefit pension plan,” which means that contribution rates are based on a percentage of a member’s earnings (A.R., vol. V, at p. 801; see also A. Kaplan and M. Frazer, Pension Law (2nd ed. 2013), at pp. 2‑3). Both members and the RCMP are required to contribute to the Plan (Act, ss. 5 and 29.2). A member’s pension is determined based on the years of “pensionable service,” that is, the period of service credited to a member at retirement (Act, s. 6). All members accrue pensionable service at the same rate regardless of whether they work part‑ or full‑time. This means that one‑year of part‑time work and one year of full‑time work both count as one year of pensionable service.
[154] This important nuance is missing from our colleague’s reasons, which speak only of full‑time pensionable service (see, e.g., para. 14).
[155] The only employment statuses provided for under the Plan are full‑time, part‑time, and LWOP. The Regulations define a “full‑time member” as one who is engaged to work 40 hours per week (s. 2.1; see also A.R., vol. V, at p. 803). Meanwhile, a “part‑time member” is described as a member who is engaged to work a minimum of 12 hours per week and is not a full‑time member (ss. 2.1 and 5.2(1)). Importantly, there are no specific provisions relating to job‑sharing in the Plan. This makes sense, given that the relevant policies define job‑sharing as a form of part‑time work. Job‑sharers are therefore treated as working part‑time during the period in which they job‑share.
[156] All members contribute to the pension fund at the same rate, set by Treasury Board as a percentage of their salary. Upon retirement, members receive a pension benefit that is proportional to the assigned hours of work: the benefits are prorated to account for any part‑time service. As the respondent’s pension expert explained, “This approach aims to ensure that part‑time members and full‑time members are treated equitably by tying pension benefits to assigned hours of work” (A.R., vol. V, at p. 805).
[157] Members’ pension benefits are based on the average annual pay received for the five best consecutive years of highest paid pensionable service. For periods of part‑time pensionable service, the average annual pay is based on the “full‑time equivalent” of the authorized rate of pay and is then prorated to reflect the hours actually worked. The respondent’s pension expert explains that “[t]his method ensures that members will not be penalized based on when in their career the part‑time service occurred” (p. 806).
[158] As we will discuss, the core of the appellants’ argument focuses on the “buy‑back” option available to members who take LWOP. It is therefore also important to understand how the “buy‑back” option works. Members who take LWOP have no assigned hours of work and are therefore not remunerated but maintain continuity of employment. For the first three months of an LWOP period, members must contribute to the pension fund the amount they would have contributed had they been working (Act, s. 6(a)(ii)(A); Regulations, s. 10(1)(a) and (4)). Following that period, members may elect not to contribute for some or all of the balance of the LWOP period (Act, s. 7(1)). However, members who choose to treat the remaining LWOP period as pensionable must pay two or two and a half times the amount they would have paid had they been working (Act, s. 7(1); Regulations, s. 10(1)(b)).[14] This is what is meant by “buying back” pensionable service.
[159] Crucially, pension benefits for members who take LWOP are determined based on the status they held immediately before taking LWOP (Regulations, ss. 5.4, 10(4) and 10.1). In other words, members who worked part‑time prior to taking LWOP and buy back that pensionable service will earn a part‑time pension benefit for the period of LWOP.
[160] As the foregoing shows, members who “buy back” pensionable service following a period of LWOP are making contributions for periods in which they did not work. Conceptually, therefore, it makes sense to say that they are “buying back” that time. In contrast, members who job‑share make pension contributions throughout the job‑sharing period. We therefore agree with the respondent that it is inaccurate to speak of “buying back” service when it comes to job‑sharing. The hours worked while job‑sharing are already fully pensionable; there is no remaining time to be “bought back”. Job‑sharers worked part‑time hours and received part‑time pension benefits for the period they job‑shared. The appellants, however, are seeking to obtain a full‑time pension benefit in respect of a period where they have worked part‑time hours. To be clear, no other members are entitled to such a benefit. Even members who take LWOP are limited to the hours they worked prior to taking LWOP (e.g. the part‑time member who takes LWOP is able to buy back part‑time, but not full‑time, pension benefits for their time spent on LWOP). The appellants are, in this sense, asking to be put in a better position than everyone else under the Plan, and, indeed, under any of the other 10 public sector pension plans. Our colleague elides this vital point, which underlies our reasoning and undermines hers.
[161] Instead, she draws attention to the fact that members who are suspended can obtain full‑time pension credit (para. 25). The RCMP’s Administration Manual II.8 does state that “[t]he period of time a member is suspended without pay and allowances will count as pensionable service” (A.R., vol. II, at p. 229). But there is almost no evidence before the Court as to how this works. It may be that a member who worked part‑time prior to a suspension is entitled only to part‑time pension credit, which would seem to align with how the Plan otherwise works. We simply do not know. Moreover, during the hearing, the respondent stated this option is no longer available and has not been for some time, noting that the document relied on by the appellants dates back to 2003. It is not appropriate to ascribe any significance whatsoever to the situation of suspended members given this evidentiary void.
[162] In short, it is incumbent upon this Court in judging the constitutionality of the Plan to understand and account for how the scheme operates as a whole, rather than compare options that are available to different groups line‑by‑line. And, considering the Plan as a whole, it is clear that it accommodates various stages of a member’s life and career. It is meant to be flexible and meet different needs at different times.
III. Analysis
[163] The appellants say the Plan violates s. 15 of the Charter in its application to members who job‑share, by denying them the right to accrue full‑time pension credit for periods when they job‑shared for childcare reasons. In our view, it does not.
[164] We stress in coming to this conclusion that the Court is not called upon to decide whether the Plan represents good or bad policy on the part of Parliament (in the legislation) and the executive (in the regulations). The task of the Court, rather, is to assess whether the Plan respects the bounds of the constitutional obligations imposed on the state (Vriend v. Alberta, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 493, at para. 136).
[165] Section 15 protects individuals against state‑imposed discrimination. Like any other Charter right, it applies to the actions of the state, and not to private acts of discrimination (s. 32; RWDSU v. Dolphin Delivery Ltd., [1986] 2 S.C.R. 573, at p. 597; P. W. Hogg, Constitutional Law of Canada (5th ed. Supp. (loose‑leaf)), vol. 2, at pp. 55‑12 to 55‑13). In the case at bar, the appellants’ claim is premised on the relationship between their sex, the allocation of childcare responsibilities in society, and the fact they job‑shared. Their argument is that, because primary responsibility for childcare has historically fallen on women, the Plan ought to have allowed them to “buy back” additional pensionable service for the time they job‑shared to fulfill their childcare responsibilities.
[166] It is indisputable that women have historically been disadvantaged in the workplace in part by the demands of childcare. This Court has recognized this disadvantage, notably in matters of compensation, in Alliance, at para. 6, and Centrale des syndicats du Québec v. Quebec (Attorney General), 2018 SCC 18, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 522, at paras. 2, 58 and 138. In this case, the application judge was presented with, and accepted, evidence showing that “women continue to assume traditional roles in the home and [that] women are more likely than their male counterparts to scale back at work to respond to ‘role overload’ and work‑life conflict” (para. 72). She also accepted evidence that women continue to make up a larger proportion of the part‑time labour force, particularly between the ages of 25 and 44 when they are most likely to be raising children (para. 168).
[167] Further, the Federal Court of Appeal has described systemic discrimination as “a continuing phenomenon which has its roots deep in history and in societal attitudes. [And] cannot be isolated to a single action or statement” (Public Service Alliance of Canada v. Canada (Department of National Defence) (C.A.), [1996] 3 F.C. 789, at para. 16). And it exists within the private and public spheres. Some aspects of government employment policies, for example, have contributed to women’s systemic disadvantage (see, e.g., Newfoundland (Treasury Board) v. N.A.P.E., 2004 SCC 66, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 381). However, many private sources — that is, longstanding phenomena other than government policies — also contribute to women’s ongoing systemic disadvantage. A clear example of this is how parents share and expect each other to share domestic responsibilities, including childcare.
[168] In the present case, the Plan represents neither a public nor private source of ongoing systemic disadvantage. It does not contribute to women’s systemic disadvantage; nor does it reinforce, perpetuate, or exacerbate the pre‑existing disadvantage of women in the workplace which arises in part from unequal distribution of parental responsibilities. Rather, it seeks to ameliorate (although without eliminating) the effects of that pre‑existing disadvantage on women’s careers in the RCMP by providing employment options which allow them the flexibility to continue to pursue their careers while raising children. This case therefore raises the question: can a court strike down part of a statutory scheme for simply being insufficiently remedial? In our respectful view, and as we explain below, it cannot.
A. Step One of the Section 15 Analysis
[169] As our colleague explains, this claim alleges adverse‑impact discrimination. We agree that the s. 15 test, as it is framed, can address such claims (paras. 48‑50). That test consists of the following two steps:
1. Does the law, on its face or in its impact, create a distinction on the basis of an enumerated or analogous ground?
2. Does the law fail to respond to the actual capacities and needs of the group and instead impose burdens or deny a benefit in a manner that has the effect of reinforcing, perpetuating, or exacerbating their disadvantage?
(Kahkewistahaw First Nation v. Taypotat, 2015 SCC 30, [2015] 2 S.C.R. 548, at paras. 19‑20; Alliance, at para. 25; Centrale, at para. 22.)
[170] That the test can account for adverse‑impact discrimination is shown by its inquiry into whether a law creates a distinction in its impact. As this Court recognized in Withler, in adverse‑impact cases, “the claimant will have more work to do at the first step” (para. 64).
[171] The concept of a “distinction” has been central to our s. 15 jurisprudence since Andrews v. Law Society of British Columbia, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 143, which described discrimination as “a distinction, whether intentional or not but based on grounds relating to personal characteristics of the individual or group” (p. 174 (emphasis added)). As the Court explained in Withler:
Inherent in the word “distinction” is the idea that the claimant is treated differently than others. Comparison is thus engaged, in that the claimant asserts that he or she is denied a benefit that others are granted or carries a burden that others do not, by reason of a personal characteristic that falls within the enumerated or analogous grounds of s. 15(1). [Emphasis added; para. 62.]
[172] As this passage demonstrates, the focus at step one upon identifying a distinction is consistent with the comparative nature of equality. Indeed, and as this Court has repeatedly emphasized, equality is “an inherently comparative concept” (R. v. Kapp, 2008 SCC 41, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 483, at para. 15; see also Andrews, at p. 164; Winko v. British Columbia (Forensic Psychiatric Institute), [1999] 2 S.C.R. 625, at para. 77; Withler, at para. 62). Comparison is relevant throughout both steps of the s. 15 analysis (Withler, at para. 61).
[173] Despite the comparative nature of equality, however, this Court has also cautioned that seeking out a “mirror comparator group” is not the proper method to evaluate s. 15 claims (Withler, at paras. 55‑60). As stated in Withler, “[t]he analysis is contextual, not formalistic, grounded in the actual situation of the group and the potential of the impugned law to worsen their [circumstances]” (para. 37; see also Centrale, at para. 135). Nonetheless, the identification of a distinction is crucial.
[174] Our colleague identifies a distinction between job‑sharers and full‑time members who work regular hours, who are suspended or who take LWOP (while failing, as noted, to consider individuals who work part‑time prior to taking LWOP) (paras. 25 and 83). Yet, she later rejects (at least facially) a comparison to members who take LWOP, dismissing it as a “formalistic” and “mirror comparator group” analysis (at paras. 93‑94), maintaining that job‑sharers are entitled to substantive equality relative to full‑time members (para. 94). As we explain below, however, it becomes evident upon closer examination that her rejection of a comparison to members who take LWOP is only superficial. The existence of the buy‑back provisions for members who take LWOP is the very reason that she finds a breach; absent that basis for comparison, the alleged breach disappears.
[175] As noted, step one of the s. 15 analysis considers whether there is a distinction “in . . . impact” (Centrale, at para. 22 (emphasis added)). A search for impact is a search for causation. The inquiry here is into whether the gap in outcomes is fully explained by pre‑existing disadvantage or whether state conduct has contributed to it. In other words, s. 15 is concerned with state conduct that contributes to — that is, augments — pre‑existing disadvantage (Taypotat, at para. 20, citing Quebec (Attorney General) v. A, 2013 SCC 5, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 61, at para. 332; Vriend, at paras. 75‑76).
[176] Further, the analysis is directed to “the effects of the challenged law or action on the claimant group” (Taypotat, at para. 18 (emphasis added), citing Quebec v. A, at para. 331). While disadvantage may persist with or without the impugned law or state action, a demonstration that it has the effect of contributing to that disadvantage is necessary.
[177] Establishing causation is particularly critical in instances where the state acts in order to address systemic discrimination. In such cases, policies that narrow a gap may fail to close it. Despite our colleague’s views to the contrary, this Court made clear in Alliance that the state does not have, by virtue of s. 15, a freestanding positive obligation to remedy social inequalities. Moreover, when the state does act with such a purpose, it can do so incrementally:
The result of finding that Quebec’s amendments breach s. 15 in this case is not, as Quebec suggests, to impose a freestanding positive obligation on the state to enact benefit schemes to redress social inequalities. Nor does it undermine the state’s ability to act incrementally in addressing systemic inequality. But s. 15 does require the state to ensure that whatever actions it does take do not have a discriminatory impact (Vriend; Eldridge v. British Columbia (Attorney General), [1997] 3 S.C.R. 624, at paras. 72‑80). [Emphasis added; para. 42.]
This is consistent with the general focus of s. 15, as explained in Quebec v. A: “If the state conduct widens the gap between the historically disadvantaged group and the rest of society rather than narrowing it, then it is discriminatory” (para. 332 (emphasis added)). These clear and recent statements of this Court should mandate dismissal of this appeal.
[178] Our colleague overcomes the requirement of causation, and these statements, by relaxing the claimant’s evidentiary burden to the point of insignificance. She posits that “evidence of statistical disparity and of broader group disadvantage may demonstrate disproportionate impact,” although she adds that “neither is mandatory and their significance will vary depending on the case” (para. 67 (emphasis added)). With respect to “broader group disadvantage,” a single claimant’s “own evidence,” or even judicial notice, is all she requires (paras. 57 and 66‑67). While courts must evaluate evidence in light of “the proof which it was in the power of one side to have produced, and in the power of the other to have contradicted” (Snell v. Farrell, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 311, at p. 328, quoting Blatch v. Archer (1774), 1 Cowp. 63, 98 E.R. 969, at p. 970), ultimately the onus is on the claimant to establish causation. In many contexts, subjective anecdotal evidence is simply incapable of meeting this objective onus (e.g. Taypotat, at paras. 33‑34; Auton (Guardian ad litem of) v. British Columbia (Attorney General), 2004 SCC 78, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 657, at paras. 58 and 62; Gosselin v. Quebec (Attorney General), 2002 SCC 84, [2002] 4 S.C.R. 429, at paras. 8 and 47). Our colleague’s relaxed approach also risks overlooking the interests of the public good (B. W. Miller, “Majoritarianism and Pathologies of Judicial Review”, in G. Webber et al., Legislated Rights: Securing Human Rights through Legislation (2018), 181, at p. 196).
[179] With respect to statistical disparity, our colleague contends that “clear and consistent statistical disparities can show a disproportionate impact on members of protected groups, even if the precise reason for that impact is unknown” (para. 62). In this case, then, because there is a statistical disparity between women and men with respect to who has taken advantage of the job‑sharing program, and because there is evidence that women have historically borne a greater part of childcare responsibilities and formed a greater proportion of the part‑time labour force, she finds that the law has a disproportionate impact on women (paras. 97‑106).
[180] With respect, this analysis is unsound, since it assumes that correlation between the number of women who have taken advantage of the job‑sharing program and evidence of disproportionate childcare responsibilities falling upon women is the function of causation, whereas it might well be the function of independent factors. Correlation itself is not proof of causation. Indeed, where one is dealing with complex social and economic considerations, like sex and employment, one can readily assume that there are many factors involved, some of which will give rise to causation while others will simply be the result of coincidence (that is, caused by independent factors).
[181] But it is causation that must be demonstrated between the law and the disadvantage. It is not enough for our colleague to refer to a statistical disparity and a broader group disadvantage. Indeed, the presence of a statistical disparity is precisely what is to be expected where a law is enacted, as the relevant portions of the Plan were, to incrementally narrow a pre‑existing systemic disadvantage. When the law fails to completely eradicate such disadvantage, an element of disparity will obviously remain. It follows that to accept statistical disparity and broader group disadvantage as sufficient to demonstrate that a law creates a distinction in impact is to do away with this Court’s statement made only two years ago in Alliance that s. 15 neither imposes “a freestanding positive obligation on the state to . . . redress social inequalities” nor “undermine[s] the state’s ability to act incrementally in addressing systemic inequality” (para. 42). It would also represent an undisciplined judicial expansion of the scope of s. 15, which does not apply to private acts of discrimination, because it would render the state responsible for discrimination it has not caused.
[182] We turn now to the appellants’ argument that the Plan, on its face or in its impact, draws a distinction based on not just the enumerated ground of sex, but also on “family status,” or “parental status” which they argue should be recognized as an analogous ground.
[183] We agree with our colleague that it is inappropriate to recognize an analogous ground solely for the purpose of this litigation (para. 114). Not only is this inappropriate, this approach was squarely rejected in Corbiere v. Canada (Minister of Indian and Northern Affairs), [1999] 2 S.C.R. 203, at paras. 8‑9. We also agree that, because this case can be resolved on the basis of the enumerated ground of sex, it is, substantially for the reasons she gives, unnecessary and unwise to consider parental or family status. The recognition of an analogous ground has significant implications as it opens up the possibility of new lines of Charter claims; once an analogous ground is recognized, it “always stand[s] as a constant marker of potential legislative discrimination” (Corbiere, at para. 10). Recognition of further analogous grounds should be left for cases where there is sufficient argument and evidence, and where it is necessary to do so. It should not be done on an ad hoc basis.
[184] Focusing, then, on the enumerated ground of sex, there are two ways in which a distinction can be framed in this case. Each is based to some extent on comparison, which is to be expected given the inherently comparative nature of s. 15. But neither is based on the “mirror comparator” group approach rejected by this Court, in which the comparator ‘“mirrors the characteristics of the claimant (or claimant group) relevant to the benefit or advantage sought’ except for the personal characteristic on which the claim [is] based” (Withler, at para. 49, quoting Hodge v. Canada (Minister of Human Resources Development), 2004 SCC 65, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 357, at para. 23). In other words, these distinctions do not look for a situation that is in every way identical to the claimant group except for the enumerated ground. Our analysis, rather, is contextual, considering the various facets of the Plan and the evidence that is available on the composition of RCMP membership.
[185] The first distinction can be drawn by looking to full‑time members. Job‑sharers, unlike full‑time members, do not obtain a full 40 hours of weekly pensionable service. The distinction is said to be based on sex because members of the job‑sharing program are disproportionately women, whereas uninterrupted full‑time employment is a male pattern of employment. We agree that a distinction is shown here.
[186] A second way of identifying a distinction in this case is by comparison to members who take LWOP. Our colleague expressly rejects this as the relevant comparison (paras. 93‑94). Nonetheless, she begins her analysis by stating that “[u]nlike full‑time members who work regular hours, who are suspended or who take unpaid leave, full‑time RCMP members who job‑share are classified as part‑time workers under the Regulations and cannot . . . obtain full‑time pension credit for their service” (para. 25 (emphasis added; footnote omitted)). In other words, the reason that our colleague finds a distinction is based on a comparison to members who take LWOP. If the option to buy back pensionable service for periods of LWOP did not exist, the distinction would vanish. Further, and as we have already observed, not all members who take LWOP have the right to receive full‑time pension credit for their service. Only members who were working full‑time hours before taking LWOP may do so. Throughout her reasons, our colleague fails to account for this nuance.
[187] In any event, the substance of this alleged distinction is that, with respect to pensionable service, job‑sharers are limited to the numbers of hours they work per week, while members who take LWOP are not as they have the option to “buy back” pensionable service. But this distinction is not based on sex: there is no evidence that members taking LWOP are less likely to be women than members participating in the job‑sharing program. As the Court of Appeal noted, “there was very little evidence about the number of RCMP members who have opted to job share or to work part‑time and no evidence about those who have opted to take an unpaid leave of absence” (para. 17 (emphasis added)). Nor was there “any evidence to suggest that more men than women or more childless individuals than those with children had opted to take leaves without pay” (para. 52). Further, the RCMP’s Administration Manual II.5 on leave recognizes various approved reasons for LWOP: education, spousal relocation, care and nurturing of preschool‑aged children, and personal needs. Our colleague cannot simply assume, without evidence, that job‑sharers as a group are more likely to be women than members who take LWOP. Both options are specifically but not exclusively available for women.
[188] Therefore, the distinction between job‑sharing and LWOP is not based on an enumerated or analogous ground. The analysis fails at step one. However, bearing in mind that we have found that the comparison between job‑sharers (who do not obtain a full 40 hours of weekly pensionable service) and full‑time members (who do) qualifies at the first step of the s. 15 analysis as a distinction based on sex, we turn to the second step. Here, given the contextual nature of the analysis, taking LWOP into account remains important.
B. Step Two of the Section 15 Analysis
[189] Having shown that the Plan creates a distinction that, in its impact, is based on sex, the second stage of the s. 15(1) analysis asks whether that distinction is discriminatory in that it fails to respond to the actual capacities and needs of the group and instead imposes burdens or denies a benefit in a manner that has the effect of reinforcing, perpetuating, or exacerbating the disadvantage of women (Andrews, at p. 182; Withler, at para. 31; Taypotat, at para. 20).
[190] This Court has said that historic disadvantage plays a significant role in identifying substantive discrimination (Law v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 497, at paras. 63‑67; Kapp, at paras. 15‑16 and 35‑36; Taypotat, at para. 20). Substantive discrimination, however, cannot be reduced to historical disadvantage. In some circumstances, laws can maintain significant disadvantage while treating individuals equally and without discrimination. For example, securities and property legislation represent state action that supports a system of private property ownership. Where the distribution of private property between men and women is unequal, this legislation allows that unequal distribution to persist. Nonetheless, the legislation is not discriminatory. Under our colleague’s approach, the second step of the s. 15 test serves only to check if the unequal impact of a law impacts a historically disadvantaged group; there is no analysis of whether the unequal impact corresponds with a group’s actual circumstances or needs or whether it is in any other sense substantively discriminatory.
[191] Though substantive discrimination has been described differently over the years, it has always required an element of arbitrariness or unfairness. This element has been most often expressed as a failure to respond to individuals’ actual capacities, needs and circumstances (Andrews, at pp. 174‑75; Law, at para. 70; Withler, at paras. 32 and 65; Taypotat, at para. 20). For a time, perpetuating prejudice and stereotyping were seen as essential features of substantive discrimination (Kapp, at paras. 23‑24; Withler, at paras. 34‑36). More recently, a more contextual analysis has been preferred, because arbitrary discrimination need not take the form of promoting negative attitudes (Quebec v. A, at paras. 327‑31; see also Alliance, at para. 28).
[192] Howsoever it has been expressed, this element of arbitrariness or unfairness has never been confused with a discriminatory purpose. A discriminatory purpose can indicate substantive discrimination, but is not required to establish it (Andrews, at p. 174; Quebec v. A, at paras. 325‑30; Centrale, at para. 35). Substantive discrimination is focused on effect rather than intention.
[193] The academic literature cited by our colleague supports requiring an element of arbitrariness or unfairness to establish discrimination. It indicates that, while discrimination need not be intentional, it is fundamentally a form of wrongful behaviour (D. G. Réaume, “Harm and Fault in Discrimination Law: The Transition from Intentional to Adverse Effect Discrimination” (2001), 2 Theor. Inq. L. 349, at pp. 351 and 376‑80; H. Collins and T. Khaitan, “Indirect Discrimination Law: Controversies and Critical Questions”, in H. Collins and T. Khaitan, eds., Foundations of Indirect Discrimination Law (2018), 1, at pp. 25‑29; S. Moreau, “What Is Discrimination?” (2010), 38 Philosophy & Public Affairs 143, at p. 146).
[194] Our colleague now suggests, however, that the sole focus of the substantive discrimination analysis is historical disadvantage (at para. 77) and that any factors relating to arbitrariness or unfairness must be confined to the s. 1 analysis (paras. 78‑80). This robs the substantive discrimination analysis of its purpose, departing significantly and without acknowledgment or justification from decades of jurisprudence.
[195] Our colleague’s removal of considerations of arbitrariness or unfairness from the s. 15 analysis has far‑reaching consequences for this appeal. As we identified above, a distinction arises based on sex when comparing members who job‑share to members with male pattern employment, that is, members who work 40‑hour weeks throughout their careers. Because the pension benefits of members in the job‑sharing program are prorated to reflect the lower number of hours they worked, they receive a lower level of pension benefits than members with a male pattern of employment.
[196] Pension benefits are best viewed as part of a whole compensation package, as they are a form of remuneration (IBM Canada Limited v. Waterman, 2013 SCC 70, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 985, at para. 4; Parry v. Cleaver, [1970] A.C. 1 (H.L.), at p. 16). In this case, members who job‑share receive no additional compensation to offset their lower level of pension benefits. On the contrary, they receive lower pay as well as lower pension benefits, because both pay and pension benefits are tied to hours worked. Our colleague suggests that offering a lower level of pension benefits to members in the job‑sharing program “perpetuates a long‑standing source of economic disadvantage” of women relative to men (para. 108). This disadvantage, she says, cannot be justified on the basis that job‑sharers choose to work fewer hours.
[197] We accept that in most contexts, choice cannot protect differential treatment from a finding of discrimination. In this case, however, the logical extension of our colleague’s argument is that if other part‑time members (i.e. those in arrangements other than job‑sharing) are predominantly women (as it has been suggested), they too are entitled to substantive equality relative to full‑time members in matters of compensation. Are all part‑time members therefore entitled to the option of contributing to the Plan as though they were full‑time members?
[198] Herein lies the significance of our colleague’s relegation of considerations of arbitrariness or unfairness to the s. 1 analysis. It is not, in general, discriminatory (in an arbitrary or unfair sense) for an employer to prorate benefits according to hours worked (see, e.g., Royal Commission on Equality in Employment, Report of the Commission on Equality in Employment (1984), at pp. 27‑28).[15] Employers are expected to treat employees equally within the context of an employment relationship that is predicated on an exchange of work for compensation. Prorating compensation, including benefits, according to work is not arbitrary or discriminatory when it responds to employees’ actual capacities and circumstances (Taypotat, at para. 20).
[199] But even were we to take our colleague’s recasting of the s. 15(1) analysis as legitimate, her open‑ended approach leaves much to be desired as a matter of logic. For example, if, as she says, it is discriminatory towards the appellants to tie pension benefits and other compensation to hours worked, why stop at allowing part‑time and job‑sharing members to “buy back” additional pension benefits? After all, full‑time members do not have to “buy back” their pensions. On our colleague’s logic, if hours worked are not relevant, then part‑time and job‑sharing members should receive a full‑time pension without buying back hours. And if compensation cannot be tied to hours worked, then part‑time and job‑sharing members should receive a full‑time salary as well. Taking our colleague’s argument to its natural conclusion shows the vast implications of her position. One searches in vain for a logical or rational stopping point to either the entitlements that would flow from her line of reasoning, or the scope of judicial intervention to award them.
[200] Conversely, we posit simply that employers must be able to compensate employees based on hours worked. This is our central point, which our colleague does not attempt to answer.
[201] While prorating pension benefits according to hours worked is not in itself discriminatory, it might be so on this Court’s jurisprudence if some groups of employees were to receive more favourable treatment than others where such treatment reinforces, perpetuates, or exacerbates disadvantage. As we have discussed, the distinction based on members who job‑share compared to those who take LWOP is not based on sex. However, in accordance with the contextual analysis of the broader scheme mandated by Withler, the LWOP provisions remain an important consideration at step two.
[202] We accept, as our colleague says (at para. 94), that the proper analysis as it was described in Withler must not devolve into a narrow comparison between members who job‑share and those who take LWOP. There is, however, a degree of inconsistency in our colleague’s approach as she states that members who job‑share are entitled to “substantive equality” to members with a male pattern of employment and yet focuses her comparison on members who take LWOP, who (unlike members with a male pattern of employment) have the option to buy back additional pension benefits. This is made plain by our colleague’s remedy: she does not require that all part‑time members should have the option of buying back the same pension benefits as full‑time members; rather, this option is made available only to those who have temporarily reduced their hours like those on LWOP. It is, therefore, the presence of LWOP, and buy‑back rights for members on LWOP, that render the Plan unconstitutional for our colleague. LWOP is the linchpin of her decision.
[203] With respect, this is contrary to the contextual approach mandated by Withler. Job‑sharing and LWOP are options that may be valuable to members at different points in their lives and careers. Job‑sharing allows members to continue to work with reduced hours, while LWOP allows members to maintain continuity of employment without working. Each of these programs represents a package of benefits and responsibilities designed to balance the needs of the employer and of members at various stages of their careers. It is inappropriate to cherry‑pick particular elements out of such packages and compare them in isolation, seeking line‑by‑line parity (Withler, at paras. 73, 76 and 79). Instead, a contextual analysis must consider the full packages and ask “whether the lines drawn are generally appropriate, having regard to the circumstances of the persons impacted and the objects of the scheme. Perfect correspondence between a benefit program and the actual needs and circumstances of the claimant group is not required” (para. 67). In other words, the focus must be on the “actual impact” of the law in its full context (P. J. Monahan, B. Shaw and P. Ryan, Constitutional Law (5th ed. 2017), at p. 469).
[204] Each benefit program will have its advantages and drawbacks. While members who take LWOP must pay the employer contribution for any pension benefits they buy back, the employer makes contributions for job‑sharers for each hour they work. While members who take LWOP receive no pay, job‑sharers receive income for the hours they work. The option to buy back pensionable service is an attractive feature of the LWOP package, and it is understandable that members in the job‑sharing program might want it. But on the whole, the record does not suggest that the LWOP package confers improved financial security or pension benefits when taking into account the job‑sharing program as well as continuous full‑time employment. Nor does it suggest that the lines drawn are inappropriate, having regard to all the circumstances.
[205] Offering pension benefits that are prorated to hours worked is not substantive discrimination, and it does not become substantive discrimination because members who take LWOP have the right to buy back hours of pension benefits. As a result, s. 15(1) of the Charter is not infringed, and there is no need to consider s. 1.
C. Practical Implications
[206] While the foregoing is sufficient to dispose of the matter, we wish to highlight the practical implications of our colleague’s reasons for judgment.
[207] Governments must be afforded the latitude to act incrementally when addressing a deeply ingrained, complex and persistent social phenomenon such as inequality. (This assumes that the inequality arises from factors in society; where the government itself has created the inequality, matters are, as we have already indicated, somewhat different.) There are processes by which a government must set its priorities, allocate its budget, and obtain parliamentary approval of its programs. In designing legislation to address a particular equality issue, a government can draw on far more internal and external expertise than we judges can. As a result, it is better positioned than we are to appreciate the consequences of a particular course of law‑making, both upon society and upon public resources. With these practical realities in mind, we must also recognize that, were a government expected to remove all inequalities for all groups on every occasion it acted, it may be disinclined to act, given that any remedial scheme will inevitably be under‑inclusive in some respect. Governments would, understandably, become “reluctant to create any new [remedial] benefit schemes because their limits would depend on an accurate prediction of the outcome of court proceedings under s. 15(1) of the Charter ” (Egan v. Canada, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 513, at para. 104, per Sopinka J.).
[208] To avoid this chilling effect, and to encourage governments to enact remedial legislation addressing pre‑existing disadvantage, this Court has (until now) judiciously accepted that governments may implement reforms “one step at a time, [and] addres[s] [the reforms] to the phase of the problem which seems most acute to the legislative mind” (R. v. Edwards Books and Art Ltd., [1986] 2 S.C.R. 713, at p. 772, quoting Williamson v. Lee Optical of Oklahoma, 348 U.S. 483 (1955), at p. 489). The focal point in assessing remedial legislation is not to ask whether the government has met “the gold standard” (Auton, at para. 62; see also paras. 59‑61), but to recognize that government
should not be obliged to deal with all aspects of a problem at once. It must surely be permitted to take incremental measures. It must be given reasonable leeway to deal with problems one step at a time, to balance possible inequalities under the law against other inequalities resulting from the adoption of a course of action, and to take account of the difficulties, whether social, economic or budgetary, that would arise if it attempted to deal with social and economic problems in their entirety, assuming such problems can ever be perceived in their entirety. [Emphasis added.]
(McKinney v. University of Guelph, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 229, at p. 317, per La Forest J.; see also pp. 318‑19; Schachter v. Canada, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 679, at p. 727, per La Forest J., concurring; Alberta (Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development) v. Cunningham, 2011 SCC 37, [2011] 2 S.C.R. 670, at para. 41.)
[209] At the risk of repeating ourselves, we stress that, as recently as two years ago in Alliance, the Court affirmed this commitment to judicial restraint by permitting the government to address pre‑existing disadvantage incrementally (para. 42). And it also bears repeating that Alliance stated that, first, there is no freestanding positive obligation to remedy social inequities, and secondly, that the state is entitled to act incrementally to address such inequities.
[210] That is precisely what the impugned provisions of the Plan represent: an example of a government acting incrementally to address inequities that exist in society, when it has no obligation to do so, using provisions that do not in themselves have a discriminatory impact. Like our colleague, we note that both the LWOP buy‑back provisions and job‑sharing option are ameliorative (para. 126). Under this Court’s statement of the law in Alliance, these provisions should be upheld.
[211] Our colleague disagrees. Under her approach legislation must not simply be favourable or beneficial, but sufficiently so to achieve substantive equality: s. 15(1) is breached because the Plan, though part of a remedial scheme, perpetuates (that is, fails to remove) economic disadvantage for women (para. 113). In other words, the Plan is insufficiently remedial.
[212] The practical effect of this decision is to abandon the foundational principles so recently affirmed in Alliance and to discourage governments from offering ameliorative programs (or, as in this case, employment options to its employees) in the future. This is because our colleague has, in effect, imposed a positive obligation on legislatures, where they attempt merely to ameliorate the effects of inequality, to eradicate those effects altogether. Such an obligation exceeds the ambit this Court has given s. 15(1), which, unlike certain other provisions of the Charter that appear to compel government action (e.g. ss. 3, 14, 20 and 23), “does not impose upon governments the obligation to take positive actions to remedy the symptoms of systemic inequality” (Thibaudeau v. Canada, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 627, at para. 38, per L’Heureux‑Dubé J., dissenting, but not on this point; see also Auton, at paras. 2 and 41; Alliance, at para. 42; Centrale, at para. 33; Andrews, at pp. 163, 171 and 175; McKinney, at p. 318; Lovelace v. Ontario, 2000 SCC 37, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 950, at paras. 90‑92).
[213] Requiring that legislation be sufficiently remedial not only changes the scope of s. 15(1), but also pulls courts outside their institutional competence. The judiciary is ill‑equipped to grapple with the public policy and budgetary complexities in legislating benefit plans. “[A]dvancing the cause of human rights . . . . invites a measure of deference for legislative choice” (McKinney, at p. 318). This is because only legislatures have the institutional capacity to conduct the research and study necessary to assess how, and at what pace, its resources should be applied to most effectively address a particular pre‑existing equality issue (and ultimately, to oversee that implementation). Courts are not well placed to define the nature and scope of an obligation to enact sufficiently remedial legislation (Ferrel v. Ontario (Attorney General) (1998), 42 O.R. (3d) 97 (C.A.), at p. 113).
[214] Consider this Plan, for example. In light of our colleague’s decision, what is to stop an RCMP employee from working full‑time for a very short time before entering a job‑sharing agreement? That employee would apparently be permitted to buy back full‑time pension benefits, whereas the employee who entered the force as a part‑time member, and has since remained part‑time, will not. Relatedly, what does it mean for employees to “temporarily reduce” their hours? What if an employee entered a job‑sharing agreement to care for her children, but did not return to full‑time work once her children became adults? Of course, we do not know these things, and we cannot know them. Nor are we expected to know them, or even anticipate them. But for that same reason, we are expected to keep to the limits of our institutional competencies, and not fiddle with the complex mechanics of legislative schemes like the Plan.
[215] In the case at bar, any disadvantage the appellants face is caused not by the impugned provisions or any government action, but by the unequal division of household and family responsibilities and social circumstances such as the availability of quality childcare. The solution to addressing these underlying matters, which exist outside of the Plan and the purview of courts, is surely not to strike down remedial legislation. In our colleague’s view, however, these true causes of the disadvantage are “entirely irrelevant” (para. 71). She allows for judicial intervention whenever a court is able to identify in the case before it a related social circumstance it wishes to address. Courts are now empowered to engage in “transformation” of the law if they simply believe that “institutions and relations must be changed” (para. 36, citing British Columbia (Public Service Employee Relations Commission) v. BCGSEU, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 3, at para. 41, quoting S. Day and G. Brodsky, “The Duty to Accommodate: Who Will Benefit?” (1996), 75 Can. Bar Rev. 433, at p. 462). Respectfully, we say that this is not our role.
[216] A related and final point on the practical implications of our colleague’s decision. For 30 years, this Court has struggled to define the term “substantive equality.” An intelligible and principled definition continues to be elusive. Indeed, this case illustrates the difficulties posed by the slippery quality of “substantive equality” — the core value of our colleague’s decision (at paras. 47‑48) — and its constant shifting in this Court’s jurisprudence.
[217] While the Court has stated that substantive equality is not formal equality (Withler, at paras. 2 and 39; Kapp, at para. 15; Centrale, at para. 25; Hodge, at para. 25), it has said little to address what substantive equality is. Scant guidance has been offered beyond describing substantive equality as the “animating norm,” “goal,” “approach,” “engine,” and now the “philosophical premise” of s. 15(1) (Withler, at para. 2; Cunningham, at para. 38; Alliance, at para. 25; Centrale, at para. 25; Taypotat, at para. 17; majority reasons, at paras. 40, 42 and 48). Metaphor and ascription has prevailed over actual definition. Commentators have taken notice:
It is . . . essential [for this Court] to frame a conceptually rigorous understanding of substantive equality as it operates in Canadian equality jurisprudence.
. . .
. . . there has been no comparable agreement on substantive equality as a state of affairs, i.e., what a situation in which the ideal is instantiated through law would look like, as opposed to the ideal’s methodological dimension. Nor has substantive equality been given a positive definition by the Court. Rather, it has been defined negatively as an approach to section 15(1) contrasting with a formal equality approach. [Emphasis added.]
(A. R. Sangiuliano, “Substantive Equality As Equal Recognition: A New Theory of Section 15 of the Charter ” (2015), 52 Osgoode Hall L.J. 601, at pp. 606‑8)
Others have gone further, for example, noting that despite the efforts of “[m]any scholars . . . to flesh out the precise requirements of substantive equality,” this Court’s elaboration of same has been “sketchy and occasionally contradictory” (J. Eisen, “Grounding Equality in Social Relations: Suspect Classification, Analogous Grounds and Relational Theory” (2017), 42 Queen’s L.J. 41, at pp. 60‑61).
[218] To be clear, we do not seek to overturn the jurisprudence that our colleague recounts in her reasons. Rather, we aim to give effect to it. Our disagreement is about the meaning and requirements of substantive equality: we view her approach as lacking in the clarity and guidance necessary to give effect properly to the Charter ’s purposes, notably with regard to legislation that is fundamentally ameliorative. It is for this reason that we highlight the lack of a substantive definition surrounding the norm of “substantive equality” in this Court’s jurisprudence. The concept has not been defined in a manner that renders s. 15 rights, or even the criteria by which they are adjudicated, knowable in advance by claimants and the state, or applicable with any consistency by courts.
[219] This lack of definition ex ante is antithetical to any notion of judicial restraint. Where a legal test lacks defined bounds, courts applying it exercise truly arbitrary powers of review. And that is the point at which we have arrived with “substantive equality.” It has become an unbounded, rhetorical vehicle by which the judiciary’s policy preferences and personal ideologies are imposed piecemeal upon individual cases. Consider our colleague’s approach here: legislation that is ameliorative in both intent and effect is judicially reconfigured because it is not ameliorative enough, or more precisely, not ameliorative in ways our colleague would prefer. It is also a prime example of how the goalposts of “substantive equality” are constantly on the move, evidenced most clearly by our colleague’s abandonment of the prudent guidance in Alliance, at para. 42, regarding incremental measures to alleviate systemic inequality. Indeed, her approach in this case lends support to Professor Young’s damning criticism that substantive equality is “an unelaborated, cryptic guidepost pointing to the equality outcome the author prefers” (M. Young, “Unequal to the Task: ‘Kapp’ing the Substantive Potential of Section 15” (2010), 50 S.C.L.R. (2d) 183, at p. 185). Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes’s observation, made in Baldwin v. Missouri, 281 U.S. 586 (1930), at p. 595, regarding the U.S. doctrine of substantive due process, is also apposite:
As the decisions now stand, I see hardly any limit but the sky to the invalidating of those rights if they happen to strike a majority of this Court as for any reason undesirable. I cannot believe that the [Fourteenth] Amendment was intended to give us carte blanche to embody our economic or moral beliefs in its prohibitions. Yet I can think of no narrower reason that seems to me to justify the present and the earlier decisions to which I have referred.
[220] The result of all this is corrosive of the rule of law. Our colleague wonders aloud what our definition of the rule of law is (para. 135). We share the views of jurists such as Lord Bingham and Sharpe J.A.: the concept of the rule of law has interlocking components (see T. Bingham, The Rule of Law (2010), at pp. 160‑70; R. J. Sharpe, Good Judgment: Making Judicial Decisions (2018), at pp. 122‑24). One is pertinent here: Canadians should be governed by rules, stated and knowable in advance, that enable them to guide their conduct. As Sharpe J.A. writes:
. . . the [Supreme] [C]ourt has insisted that there must be an intelligible standard, capable of providing “an adequate basis for legal debate . . . as to its meaning by reasoned analysis applying legal criteria.”
In Irwin Toy . . . the majority wrote that . . . . “[w]here there is no intelligible standard” and where the decision‑maker has been “given a plenary discretion to do whatever seems best in a wide set of circumstances,” the essential minimum requirements of the rule of law are not met.
(p. 123, quoting R. v. Nova Scotia Pharmaceutical Society, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 606, at p. 639; Irwin Toy Ltd. v. Quebec (Attorney General), [1989] 1 S.C.R. 927, at p. 983)
[221] Our colleague’s appeal to stare decisis, we say with respect, therefore misses the point. The issue is not whether this Court’s s. 15 jurisprudence should be “respected” (para. 135). The issue, rather, is whether that jurisprudence as she has interpreted it states a standard that is practically knowable and reasonably predictable as to results. In our view, the concept of “substantive equality” has become so vague that it is impossible for claimants or legislatures to anticipate its demands in advance. Legislatures are, in effect, expected to hit a moving target, as “the Court continues to revise its analytical approach to section 15(1) without ever overruling or even really disapproving of its earlier judgments on the aspects of those judgments that have now been reversed” (J. Koshan and J. Watson Hamilton, “Meaningless Mantra: Substantive Equality after Withler” (2011), 16 Rev. Const. Stud. 31, at p. 61). This “revisionist approach” — the constant moving of the goal posts of “substantive equality” to suit judicial preference — “will undoubtedly continue to cause further confusion” (p. 61).
[222] This suggests another, less normative, but more practical concern: if the demands of substantive equality could be predicted, governments might actually be able to comply with them. Instead,
[i]n the view of many commentators, the equality jurisprudence, despite the Court’s self‑identified efforts to establish clear interpretations, has been muddled and inconsistent . . . . Put simply, it lacks the coherence to offer serious guidance about how to realize substantive equality “on the ground”.
(P. Hughes, “Supreme Court of Canada Equality Jurisprudence and ‘Everyday Life’” (2012), 58 S.C.L.R. (2d) 245, at pp. 254‑55)
In other words, legislatures can comply only with rules they can know well enough to abide by. How can a legislature know what any given court will determine to be sufficiently remedial? The immensity of the obligation that our colleague foists upon legislatures and governments — in both its unpredictability and in the amount of resources it requires — is such that none of them can reasonably be expected to bear it. This wholly disregards La Forest J.’s apt admonition in McKinney that inequality issues cannot even be fully understood, let alone remedied, all at once.
[223] The failure to properly define the scope of s. 15(1) also has the practical effect of pushing the bulk of the analysis to s. 1 (e.g. majority reasons, at paras. 79‑80). As a result, courts are not to engage in a substantive analysis of discrimination (where they have a comparative advantage relative to the legislature), but rather in the evaluation of policy (where they do not) (Law Society of British Columbia v. Trinity Western University, 2018 SCC 32, [2018] 2 S.C.R. 293, at paras. 190 and 192, per Rowe J., concurring). This fails to attend to the limits inherent in s. 15. By their very nature, “the demands of equality [cannot] be determined without considering the needs and circumstances of persons and groups in addition to the claimant,” including the practical, moral, economic and social underpinnings of the legislation in question (B. W. Miller, “Justification and Rights Limitations”, in G. Huscroft, ed., Expounding the Constitution: Essays in Constitutional Theory (2010), 93, at p. 106; see also p. 100). Otherwise, we risk allowing “for the intermediate conclusion of a right infringement to trade on the higher prestige and greater strength of a moral right that provides an undefeated reason for action” (at p. 96), watering down the significance of a finding of a s. 15(1) infringement beyond recognition, and requiring the state to justify even its most trivial decisions.
[224] In defining substantive equality, courts must bear in mind two considerations. First, s. 15(1) cannot actually guarantee equality, in its broadest sense, throughout society. Systemic disadvantage is just that — systemic, being rooted in social attitudes and institutions. This does not mean that systemic discrimination cannot or should not be addressed; rather, it simply means that s. 15(1) is limited in its capacity to do so. Section 15(1) responds only to state action, and judicial review of state action is ill‑suited to implementing the kind of wide‑ranging institutional or policy changes that are necessary to fully address systemic disadvantage. That this is so becomes apparent when one considers that all of the reports cited by our colleague are directed towards government, not court, action (e.g. Royal Commission on the Status of Women in Canada, Report of the Royal Commission on the Status of Women in Canada (1970), at p. vii). Secondly, bringing analytical discipline to s. 15(1) must start by reaffirming that equality is an inherently comparative notion (Withler, at paras. 61‑67; Koshan and Watson Hamilton, at pp. 45‑46). While mirror comparators have proved unworkable, the analysis must be imbued with a measure of comparison in order to avoid what our colleague now endorses: an unbounded, unpredictable search for “inequality.”
[225] To all this, our colleague suggests (at paras. 133‑34) that we — and, by extension, those scholars and judges who have questioned the utility and meaning of the Court’s jurisprudence on “substantive equality” — advance a straw man argument which, at root, is an argument for “formal equality.” But, and again with respect, it is our colleague who marshals a straw man argument. Our reasons apply an approach to substantive equality firmly rooted in this Court’s jurisprudence, including Alliance. The conclusion we reach was shared by all four lower‑court judges who tried to apply this Court’s jurisprudence to the facts of this case.
[226] Our colleague, on the other hand, casts aside para. 42 of Alliance as a useless “stran[d]” (at paras. 132‑33) and sidesteps Withler’s call for a contextual approach, which notably arose precisely in the circumstances of a pension scheme. In fact, her reasons are entirely devoid of any consideration of the approach to pension schemes necessitated by Withler.
[227] Indeed, more telling than what our colleague does say in response is what she does not say. Notably, she does not explain what “substantive equality” means (save by reference to what it is not — “formal equality”). She fails to define “substantive equality” in terms that allow its meaning to be understood so that the requirements of s. 15 can be practically knowable and reasonably predictable in advance. Thus loosely defined, substantive equality is almost infinitely malleable, allowing judges to invoke it as rhetorical cover for their own policy preferences in deciding a given case. Such vast and little‑bounded discretion does not accord with, but rather departs from, the rule of law.
IV. Conclusion
[228] As we see it, the sole reason the Plan is being judicially reviewed is because Parliament and the government tried to be accommodating in their employment options. If they had not offered pension buy‑back rights for members who take LWOP, there would be no basis for judicial intervention at all. The upshot of our colleague’s reasoning is that the public is now burdened with new financial obligations, simply because Parliament and the executive dared to address pre‑existing inequality incrementally, instead of taking more radical measures to eliminate it. In the future, they may well reason that inaction is the safer route.
[229] Similar issues will undoubtedly arise with any other social welfare legislation or government attempts to remedy systemic disadvantage. By reserving the right to arbitrarily second‑guess and undo any legislation that attempts to incrementally address systemic disadvantage, the Court makes it more practically difficult for legislatures and governments to implement policies that promote equality. Put simply, we see restricting the government’s ability to incrementally address disadvantage as a peculiar way to promote equality.
[230] We would therefore dismiss the appeal.
The following are the reasons delivered by
Côté J. —
I. Introduction
[231] Discrimination on the basis of sex is of the most invidious order. Like race, sex is an innate and immutable characteristic, and bears no relevant relationship to capability. Without question, women have faced a prolonged fight for equal treatment under the law, a fight marked by a society where women have historically been disadvantaged and where they continue to be so today: Public Service Alliance of Canada v. Canada (Department of National Defence) (C.A.), [1996] 3 F.C. 789, at para. 16; Quebec (Attorney General) v. Alliance du personnel professionnel et technique de la santé et des services sociaux, 2018 SCC 17, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 464. But that is not the question before this Court. Nor is the question before this Court whether the impugned legislative provisions[16] are irrational, illogical, or even under-inclusive — that a law is not perfect, or even excludes some, does not make it per se unconstitutional: Gosselin v. Quebec (Attorney General), 2002 SCC 84, [2002] 4. S.C.R. 429, at para. 55; Andrews v. Law Society of British Columbia, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 143, at pp. 168-69. Rather, over the course of three decades, this Court has carefully crafted a test to assess whether a particular form of alleged discrimination is discrimination in fact and runs afoul of the guarantee of equal treatment under the law found in s. 15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . A crucial element of s. 15(1) of the Charter is that it enumerates the grounds of discrimination that fall within its constitutional prohibition. Here, with respect, I cannot agree with my colleagues that the impugned provisions of the pension plan create a distinction on the basis of the enumerated ground of sex. I proceed to elucidate why.
II. Analysis
[232] My colleagues offer a comprehensive overview of this Court’s s. 15(1) jurisprudence, so I do not purport to do so here. While there exists clear disagreement between them as to certain elements of doctrine, I understand my colleagues and I to agree on the following: to prove discrimination under s. 15(1), including in cases of adverse effect discrimination, a claimant must (i) show that a law creates an adverse distinction based on an enumerated or analogous ground, and (ii) show that the law perpetuates, reinforces, or exacerbates pre-existing disadvantage (majority reasons, at paras. 27 and 50; Brown and Rowe JJ.’s reasons, at para. 169; R. v. Kapp, 2008 SCC 41, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 483, at para. 17; Withler v. Canada (Attorney General), 2011 SCC 12, [2011] 1 S.C.R. 396, at paras. 30 and 61; Quebec (Attorney General) v. A, 2013 SCC 5, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 61, at para. 185; Kahkewistahaw First Nation v. Taypotat, 2015 SCC 30, [2015] 2 S.C.R. 548, at paras. 19-20; Centrale des syndicats du Québec v. Quebec (Attorney General), 2018 SCC 18, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 522, at para. 22).
[233] Here, I am of the view that there is no need to proceed to the second step of the analysis, as my colleagues do, because no distinction can be made out on the basis of sex under step one.
[234] With the greatest respect, allowing the appeal on the basis of sex simpliciter is an attempt to square a circle. The effect of the impugned provisions of the pension plan is to create a distinction not on the basis of being a woman, but being a woman with children. In other words, a distinction exists not because one is a woman, but because one has caregiving responsibilities. It is telling that the statistics used by my colleague Abella J. to make her point — setting aside for now the question of their validity and even their appropriate role in a s. 15(1) analysis — are all in reference to women with children:
In my respectful view, the use of an RCMP member’s temporary reduction in working hours as a basis to impose less favourable pension consequences plainly has a disproportionate impact on women. The relevant evidence — the results of the system — showed that:
• RCMP members who worked reduced hours in the job‑sharing program were predominantly women with young children.
• From 2010-2014, 100 percent of members working reduced hours through job-sharing were women, and most of them cited childcare as their reason for doing so.
. . .
The data [the Commission of Inquiry into Part-time Work] collected suggested that almost all job-sharing participants were women, and that “[t]he arrival of a new baby was the most common primary reason for initiating job sharing” (pp. 177-78).
The Report of the Commission on Equality in Employment (1984, Rosalie Silberman Abella, comm.) expanded on the link between part-time work and childcare . . . . [Emphasis added; paras. 97 and 100-101.]
[235] The notion of women with children is inextricable from the evidence presented. It seems to me, then, that caregiving status is the only distinction created by the pension plan. In other words, the distinction in this case exists not on the basis of being a woman, but on the basis of needing to take care of someone: see Taypotat, at para. 21 (holding that under step one a claimant must “demonstrate that the law at issue has a disproportionate effect on the claimant based on his or her membership in an enumerated or analogous group”) (emphasis added); contra Centrale, at para. 28 (finding that step one was satisfied on the basis that “the claimants disproportionately suffer an adverse impact because they are women”) (emphasis in original). One does not job-share because one is a woman; one job-shares because one needs to take care of someone: Appellants’ Affidavits, A.R., vol. II, at pp. 129 et seq., and vol. III, at pp. 327-42; 2017 FC 557, at para. 22 and Annex A (CanLII).
[236] Importantly, I wish to draw particular attention to the following illustration. Consider, for instance, same-sex male couples who also have to bear the burden of taking care of their children. Consider further those individuals who bear the burden of taking care of their aging parents or spouse. These individuals, along with women with children, will all be under disproportionate pressure to job-share due to their caregiving responsibilities. Those individuals with no caregiving responsibilities will have no such pressure to job-share. The impugned provisions therefore create a distinction on the basis of caregiving responsibilities, not sex simpliciter: Withler, at para. 62.
[237] As I see it, it is essential to consider the nature of the claim before this Court. Indeed, the appellants make their claim on behalf of women with children, and not simply women — nobody has asserted a claim on behalf of women without children. It is critical to the claim, then, that the appellants had caregiving responsibilities in relation to children that made them decide to job-share. This explains why the appellants argued their claim on appeal on the basis of “intersecting” grounds of sex and parental or family status: A.F.; 2018 FCA 223, [2019] 2 F.C.R. 541, at paras. 3 and 42.
[238] However, of crucial importance to the disposition of this appeal is the fact that caregiving, parental, or family status is not recognized by this Court as an analogous ground under s. 15(1) of the Charter , nor would I recognize any of them as such here. Indeed, my colleague Abella J. provides compelling reasons not to (at paras. 119-23), as do my colleagues Brown and Rowe JJ. (at para. 183), and I find myself in agreement that it would be inappropriate to do so. Accordingly, in light of the conclusion that any distinction here depends not on sex but on caregiving responsibilities alone and that this Court cannot recognize caregiving, parental, or family status as an analogous ground in this case, the appellants’ claim must fail at step one of the s. 15(1) analysis.
[239] Thus, at least doctrinally, this case is relatively straightforward. Lengthy reasons are elicited only by virtue of the attempt to fit the claim under the enumerated ground of sex simpliciter. However, it is clear that the distinction created by the pension plan manifests itself not as a result of sex alone, but as a result of a combination of sex with caregiver status. If the majority wishes to allow the appeal, then the more doctrinally sound method would be to either recognize intersecting grounds as the appellants urge, or recognize a new analogous ground.[17] Without doing so, however, this Court has only attempted to square a circle. And, as a result, doctrinal uncertainty seeps into this Court’s s. 15(1) jurisprudence and obscures, rather than illuminates, the way forward.
[240] This brings me to my next point — responding to the analytical and doctrinal methodology needed to support the conclusion that the pension plan creates a distinction on the basis of sex alone.
[241] First, in order to support the finding that the impugned provisions create a distinction on the basis of sex (without recognizing an intersecting or analogous ground of parental, family or caregiving status), my colleague Abella J. says that, in effect, discrimination on the basis of childcare is tantamount to discrimination on the basis of sex due to their historical association with one another: see paras. 98 et seq. This argument follows the rationale of Brooks v. Canada Safeway Ltd., [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1219, where the Court recognized that pregnancy-based discrimination necessarily constituted sex-based discrimination. Indeed, my colleague Abella J. posits that evidence about certain groups “will show such a strong association with certain traits — such as pregnancy with gender — that the disproportionate impact on members of that group ‘will be apparent and immediate’”: para. 61, quoting Taypotat, at para. 33.
[242] Setting aside for now the doctrinal proposition that disproportionate impact is sufficient to meet step one, I am of the view that there is a meaningful distinction between pregnancy and sex, on the one hand, and caregiving status and sex, on the other. This case is accordingly unlike Brooks. In Brooks, the Court held that a corporate insurance plan which denied benefits to employees during pregnancy discriminated on the basis of sex. Chief Justice Dickson grounded this conclusion on the fact that pregnancy, by definition, affects only women. Writing for the Court, Dickson C.J. explained that “[w]hile pregnancy-based discrimination only affects part of an identifiable group, it does not affect anyone who is not a member of the group”: p. 1247. The present case is manifestly different. Caregiving status can be separated from sex. In Brooks, an insurance plan that discriminated against pregnant employees necessarily discriminated against women. Here, impugned provisions of the pension plan that discriminate against those with caregiving responsibilities do not necessarily discriminate against women. In other words, caregiving, unlike pregnancy, is not, by definition, associated with sex. Rather, same-sex couples with children and other individuals with caregiving responsibilities will also all be disproportionately affected. The appellants — women with children — are not “denied a benefit that others are granted . . . by reason of a personal characteristic that falls within the enumerated . . . grounds of s. 15(1)”: Withler, at para. 62. The impugned provisions create a distinction on the basis of caregiver status, not sex simpliciter.
[243] Accordingly, the only remaining way to support the conclusion that the pension plan discriminates against women — without recognizing an intersecting or analogous ground or relying on the Brooks argument — is to dispose of any requirement of causation, nexus, or tether between the impugned provisions and their effect, and look only to the statistical disparity in results (i.e. women are disproportionately affected). Indeed, my colleague Abella J. takes this doctrinal step and seemingly reduces the step one analysis to a mere search for disproportionate impact evidenced by statistical disparity: she says that “in order for a law to create a distinction based on prohibited grounds through its effects, it must have a disproportionate impact on members of a protected group. If so, the first stage of the s. 15 test will be met” (para. 52 (emphasis added); see also paras. 5, 63, 66-67, 70 and 84). My colleague then expresses “agree[ment]” (at para. 67) with the proposition that statistical disparity “will be sufficient” by itself to demonstrate disproportionate impact (para. 66, quoting D.H. v. the Czech Republic, No. 57325/00, ECHR 2007-IV, at para. 188). This doctrinal development warrants significant caution — and not just because it confounds a necessary condition with a sufficient one.[18]
[244] Disproportionate impact alone cannot be sufficient to meet step one of the s. 15(1) analysis. In other words, simply pointing to the fact that the majority of job‑sharers are presently women with children cannot in itself be sufficient to say that step one has been met. Otherwise, for example, a law that regulates the top one percent of income earners in Canada would proceed past the step one analysis simply by virtue of the fact that the top one percent of income earners in Canada are majority male.[19] Analogously, a law regulating the nursing profession would proceed past the step one analysis simply by virtue of the fact that the nursing profession is majority female.[20] Surely, the aforementioned examples are not instances of prima facie discrimination, yet they exemplify how, if disproportionate impact alone were sufficient, step one would become a mere rubber stamp in cases of adverse effect discrimination, rather than a step at which “the claimant will have more work to do”, belying the sage guidance from Withler: para. 64. Worse yet, if statistical disparities alone were sufficient, the s. 15(1) analysis would, in effect, be replaced with a green light to s. 1, where the burden is reversed and placed on the government. My colleagues may very well consider such a state of affairs to be appropriate or desirable, and I cast no judgment in this regard; however, I simply wish to point out that such a doctrinal development is not currently supported by this Court’s jurisprudence — or if it is, then with respect, it requires more justification or clarification.
[245] Relatedly, I express further trepidation over the majority’s potential invitation for statistics-based litigation: paras. 58-59, 62-63 and 66-67. In effect, as I see it, parties may now routinely proffer and challenge statistical evidence (my colleague invites claimants to “rely . . . on their own evidence . . . rather than on government reports, academic studies or expert testimony” (at para. 57)), and trial judges must now become arbiters of statistics and their veracity (my colleague says that the “weight given to statistics will depend on, among other things, their quality and methodology” (at para. 59)), thereby bolstering their findings, which are owed deference upon appellate review (and which are findings the judiciary is institutionally ill-equipped to be making (see, e.g., P. Yowell, Constitutional Rights and Constitutional Design: Moral and Empirical Reasoning in Judicial Review (2018), at pp. 70-71)). The nature of statistics means that they are presented to courts frozen at a point in time, yet in reality, they are constantly shifting — it cannot be that the very same law that is constitutional one day is unconstitutional the next based solely on statistical evidence.
[246] On this point, my colleague Abella J.’s reliance on Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424 (1971) is, respectfully, inapposite. She repeatedly cites Griggs (see paras. 32-34, 38, 53, 55 and 70-71) for the proposition that disproportionate impact is sufficient in itself to demonstrate that a law creates an adverse distinction based on a protected ground and thereby satisfies step one: see paras. 55 and 70-71. I do not think Griggs can be read in such a manner. Griggs was a statutory interpretation case concerned with Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Pub. L. 88-352, 78 Stat. 241 (1964) — not a constitutional case. Its result was compelled by the text of the statute rather than by the principles underlying unconstitutional adverse effect discrimination: Washington, Mayor of Washington, D.C. v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229 (1976). Further, as evidenced by its progeny, Griggs is limited in its scope, such that it cannot stand for the proposition that statistical disparity alone is sufficient: see Watson v. Fort Worth Bank & Trust, 487 U.S. 977 (1988), at p. 994 (holding that “the plaintiff’s burden in establishing a prima facie case goes beyond the need to show that there are statistical disparities” and that “the plaintiff must offer statistical evidence of a kind and degree sufficient to show that the practice in question has caused the exclusion of applicants for jobs or promotions because of their membership in a protected group”) (emphasis added); see also Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs v. Inclusive Communities Project, Inc., 135 S. Ct. 2507 (2015); Ricci v. DeStefano, 557 U.S. 557 (2009); Smith v. City of Jackson, Mississippi, 544 U.S. 228 (2005). Regardless, in hopes of avoiding a jurisprudential debate on case law sourced from outside this country, at bottom the American tradition of equality is markedly distinct from the Canadian tradition. While Griggs was admittedly a case of adverse effect discrimination, it was also fundamentally a case informed by the unique legacy of slavery and segregated schools endemic to American history: in Griggs, a high school education effectively served as a proxy for race (indeed, the impugned high school education and aptitude test requirements there were imposed on the same day the Civil Rights Act of 1964 came into force). In this way, in Griggs, there was a legitimate nexus established between the imposition of a high school education and aptitude test requirements and racial discrimination, and not simply a nexus that depended on statistical disparity alone (as the majority says is sufficient).
[247] While this Court has of course cited Griggs in the past, it has never done so to support the proposition that step one can be satisfied in the absence of a nexus between the impugned law and the disproportionate impact. Since the inception of our jurisprudence interpreting s. 15(1), this Court has cautioned as follows:
If the adverse effects analysis is to be coherent, it must not assume that a statutory provision has an effect which is not proved. We must take care to distinguish between effects which are wholly caused, or are contributed to, by an impugned provision, and those social circumstances which exist independently of such a provision.
(Symes v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 695, at pp. 764-65)
This pronouncement continues to be applied in the search for a necessary nexus between the impugned law and its effects in cases of adverse effect discrimination: see Miceli-Riggins v. Canada (Attorney General), 2013 FCA 158, [2014] 4 F.C.R. 709, at para. 76; Grenon v. Minister of National Revenue, 2016 FCA 4, 482 N.R. 310, at paras. 38-39 and 45; see also Canada (Attorney General) v. Lesiuk (C.A), 2003 FCA 3, [2003] 2 F.C. 697, at para. 33; Begum v. Canada (Citizenship and Immigration), 2018 FCA 181, [2019] 2 F.C.R. 488, at para. 81.
[248] Ultimately, the question under step one is whether the law, while facially neutral, creates an adverse distinction based on an enumerated or analogous ground: see Kapp, at para. 17; Withler, at paras. 30 and 61; Quebec v. A, at para. 185; Taypotat, at para. 19. This means that the claimant “must therefore demonstrate that the law at issue has a disproportionate effect on the claimant based on his or her membership in an enumerated or analogous group”: Taypotat, at para. 21 (emphasis added). Although my colleague Abella J.’s phrasing of the question under step one correctly uses the word creates (at para. 50), she later seems to read this word out by determining that mere disproportionate impact is sufficient: para. 52. This cannot be the case: to proceed past step one and show a prima facie breach, “the evidence must amount to more than a web of instinct” (Taypotat, at para. 34). A nexus between the impugned legislation and the disproportionate impact is required.
[249] This is essential to understanding why both the Federal Court and the Federal Court of Appeal held that the claim here fails at step one. Indeed, both courts found that this case “turns on the first step”: C.A. reasons, at para. 40. Applying step one to the facts, they each found that the pension plan creates no distinction based on the enumerated ground of sex. They held the following:
The fact that the vast majority of part-time members and members in a job-sharing arrangement are women, and that these job-sharers do not have the option of contributing to their pension at the full-time rate, is not a consequence of or connected to the provisions of the RCMPSA. The “trigger” is whether the member works part-time. This is not connected to the RCMPSA. Rather, this is based on the decisions the member makes, as difficult as those may be, as a family to balance work and child care, by having one parent, usually the woman, work part-time for a few years.
(F.C. reasons, at para. 137)
. . . the mere fact that women disproportionately take advantage of the job-sharing option does not mean that the pension treatment afforded to those who job-share under the RCMPSA and the Regulation creates a distinction on an enumerated or analogous ground. Likewise, as in Begum, the general expert opinion evidence filed by the appellants fails to establish the requisite nexus between the impugned provisions and a protected ground so as to give rise to a section 15 breach. In sum, the appellants were not denied buy-back rights based on their personal characteristics of being female RCMP members with young children, but rather because they elected to job-share as opposed to taking care and nurturing leave. The requisite nexus to establish a breach of section 15 of the Charter is therefore absent in this case as the appellants cannot show that the impugned provisions in the RCMPSA and Regulation impact them more negatively than others because of their sex . . . .
(C.A. reasons, at para. 53)
[250] My colleague Abella J. rejects this reasoning and its emphasis on “choice” (at paras. 85-92), and my colleagues Brown and Rowe JJ. — by implication of finding that the appellants have satisfied step one (at para. 186) — also seem to reject this reasoning (albeit perhaps for different reasons). I need not express any conclusion in this regard because, in any case, no distinction can be demonstrated here on the basis of sex.
[251] As I have established, it is hard to see how the impugned provisions create a distinction on the basis of being a woman alone. I reiterate that one does not job-share because one is a woman (i.e. sex simpliciter); one job-shares because one has caregiving responsibilities (in this case, children to take care of). The claim brought by the appellants — on behalf of women with children — crucially depends on the intersection of sex and parental or family status. The arguments proffered and statistics employed are all in reference to women with children. Like my colleague Abella J., I accept the appellant Ms. Fox’s evidence that “job-sharing is often the only child care solution for members with children” because “there is simply no around-the-clock child care available” in “rural or isolated communities”: para. 91, quoting A.R., vol. III, at p. 334. But there is no reason why this is a singularly sex-based issue: rather, it is a caregiving status issue. For instance, in those same rural or isolated areas, there is likely no around-the-clock elderly care available either, making job-sharing the only solution available for members with caregiving responsibilities. Thus the burden to job-share, and the associated distinction created by the impugned provisions of the pension plan, is faced by those members with caregiving responsibilities and is not limited to those of a certain sex. Indeed, those without such responsibilities do not face any comparable pressure to job-share. But without recognition of an analogous protected ground of parental, family, or caregiver status, or alternatively the intersection of that ground and sex (as in Lesiuk, at para. 37), the appellants’ claim must fail at step one of the s. 15(1) analysis.
[252] To be sure, the impugned provisions may very well not be rational — there may indeed be no logical reason to deprive job-sharers of full pension benefits that are guaranteed to full-time members and members on leave without pay. But it is not this Court’s role to constitutionalize normative judgments to this effect; that is the role of the electorate, and in turn, the legislature.
[253] In this sense, I wish to add one final point on the role of the judiciary vis‑à‑vis the role of the legislature. The result the majority reaches may certainly be desirable insofar as it guarantees the opportunity for increased pension benefits to RCMP members who job-share. But when the Court reaches this result in such a doctrinally precarious fashion, and when and if the impugned provisions are illogical, irrational, or under‑inclusive, then it is the legislature’s role to rectify — the remedy does not lie in the Constitution, which proscribes particular forms of discrimination, forms that do not exist here. With the greatest respect, then, the remedy sought in the case at bar should be granted by the democratic process.
III. Conclusion
[254] While I agree with Abella J. that sex-based discrimination is particularly insidious and I similarly lament society’s continued history of discrimination against women, I am in respectful disagreement as to whether the appellants have sufficiently made out a s. 15 violation here under this Court’s well-established jurisprudence.
[255] Likewise, while I agree with my colleagues Brown and Rowe JJ.’s proposed disposition of the appeal, as well as with their observations regarding the appellants’ employment status and the majority’s unprincipled expansion of the scope of s. 15(1), I write separately to express disagreement with their dismissal of the appeal on the second step of the s. 15(1) analysis rather than the first step, which is the step on which this case turns: C.A. reasons, at para. 40. Further, I write separately in order to highlight the under-inclusive nature of the pension plan, which disproportionately affects all those with caregiving responsibilities, including same-sex couples with children and individuals with caregiving responsibilities for their aging partners or parents. It therefore falls to the legislature, not the courts, to remedy any under-inclusiveness in this legislation, which was purportedly meant to assist with caregiving responsibilities in the first place.
[256] For these reasons, and with the greatest respect for my colleagues, I would dismiss the appeal.
Appeal allowed with costs throughout, Côté, Brown and Rowe JJ. dissenting.
Solicitors for the appellants: Champ & Associates, Ottawa.
Solicitor for the respondent: Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa.
Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Ontario: Attorney General of Ontario, Toronto.
Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Quebec: Attorney General of Quebec, Québec.
Solicitors for the intervener the Women’s Legal Education and Action Fund Inc.: Cavalluzzo, Toronto.
Solicitors for the intervener the Public Service Alliance of Canada: Raven, Cameron, Ballantyne & Yazbeck, Ottawa.
Solicitors for the intervener the National Police Federation: Nelligan O’Brien Payne, Ottawa.
[1] The Royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Act , R.S.C. 1985, c. R-11 (“Act ”); and the associated Royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Regulations, C.R.C., c. 1393 (“Regulations”). Except where necessary to distinguish between the Act and Regulations, I refer to them throughout these reasons as the “pension plan” or “plan”.
[2] The formula used is: 2% × Years of Pensionable Service × Average Annual Pay. Average annual pay is calculated using the member’s five best consecutive years of highest-paid pensionable service (Appeal Record, vol. V, at pp. 805-6).
[3] R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .); and C.R.C., c. 945, respectively.
[4] The Regulations use the phrase “normal number of hours of work”, which are set at 40 hours per week.
[5] British Columbia (Public Service Employee Relations Commission) v. BCGSEU, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 3 (“Meiorin”), at para. 29, citing Canada (Human Rights Commission) v. Taylor, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 892, at p. 931.
[6] Ms. Fraser’s Notice of Constitutional Question identified “parental status” as the relevant analogous ground under s. 15(1). Before this Court, she identified the relevant ground as “family status”.
[7] At the appeal hearing, counsel for Ms. Fraser was questioned on whether it is necessary for the Court to recognize family or parental status as an analogous ground under s. 15(1) (transcript, at pp. 36-40). Counsel acknowledged that “one could just argue [the appeal] on sex”, but did not abandon his position on family status (p. 37). The intervener Women’s Legal Education and Action Fund Inc. argued that the Court does not “need the analogous ground of family status” to rule for Ms. Fraser (p. 64).
[8] Rejected by the majority at para. 42 of Alliance: “. . . there is no evidence to support the in terrorem view advanced by my colleagues that finding a breach would have a ‘chilling effect’ on legislatures. That amounts to an argument that requiring legislatures to comply with Charter standards would have such an effect. Speculative concerns about the potential for inducing statutory timidity on the part of legislatures has never, to date, been an accepted analytic tool for deciding whether the Constitution has been breached. Legislatures understand that they are bound by the Charter and that the public expects them to comply with it. The courts are facilitators in that enterprise, not bystanders.”
[9] Rejected by the majority at para. 41: “. . . my colleagues imply that there is no breach of s. 15(1) of the Charter because the Quebec legislature did not create pay discrimination against women. No one has suggested that it did. But when the government passes legislation in a way that perpetuates historic disadvantage for protected groups, regardless of who caused their disadvantage, the legislation is subject to review for s. 15 compliance . . .” (emphasis in original).
[10] This argument did not deter the Court from finding a s. 15(1) breach in Alliance or in the companion case Centrale (see also McKinney, at p. 279). And the argument is even less convincing in this case, where no attempt was made by the government to justify the absence of buy-back rights as a necessary part of an ongoing strategy to address inequality, and where no support exists for that position in the record.
[11] It was in rejecting this concern that the majority in Alliance made the two statements at para. 42 which my colleagues repeatedly invoke: “The result of finding that Quebec’s amendments breach s. 15 in this case is not, as Quebec suggests, to impose a freestanding positive obligation on the state to enact benefit schemes to redress social inequalities. Nor does it undermine the state’s ability to act incrementally in addressing systemic inequality. But s. 15 does require the state to ensure that whatever actions it does take do not have a discriminatory impact.” (emphasis added)).
[12] Adam Gopnik, “The illiberal imagination: Are liberals on the wrong side of history?”, The New Yorker, March 20, 2017, 88, at p. 92.
[13] See also Young (2010), at pp. 192-98; Jennifer Koshan and Jonnette Watson Hamilton, “Meaningless Mantra: Substantive Equality after Withler” (2011), 16 Rev. Const. Stud. 31, at p. 59; Patricia Hughes, “Supreme Court of Canada Equality Jurisprudence and ‘Everyday Life’” (2012), 58 S.C.L.R. (2d) 245, at pp. 271-72.
[14] If a member elects not to treat the period as pensionable, he or she may later choose to buy back the pensionable service at a rate of two or two and a half times plus interest (Regulations, s. 10.8).
[15] “If [employees] work part-time, they should not bear the unfair financial brunt of a perception that part‑time work is not serious work. They should be remunerated and receive benefits on a prorated basis with workers employed full-time” (emphasis added).
[16] The provisions on part-time employment in the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Act , R.S.C. 1985, c. R-11 , and the associated Royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Regulations, C.R.C., c. 1393. Like my colleagues, I will refer to these laws interchangeably throughout these reasons as the “pension plan” or “plan”, or simply refer to the impugned provisions.
[17] To be clear, I am not endorsing an intersecting grounds approach or the recognition of new analogous grounds; my point is only that, rather than fiddle with existing doctrine under s. 15, it would have been more doctrinally sound (in the sense of adhering to existing doctrine) to reach the result preferred by the majority in this way.
[18] My colleague first says that in order for a law to create a distinction, “it must have a disproportionate impact on members of a protected group” — this is a necessary condition: para. 52 (emphasis added). In the very next sentence, however, she says that “[i]f so, the first stage of the s. 15 test will be met” — this also makes it a sufficient condition: para. 52 (emphasis added).
[19] From 2013-2017, the top 1 percent of income earners in Canada were 78.0, 78.3, 76.8, 76.1, and 75.8 percent male, respectively: see Statistics Canada, Table 11-10-0055-01 — High income tax filers in Canada (online).
[20] In 2019, approximately 90 percent of regulated nurses in Canada were female: see Canadian Institute for Health Information, Nursing in Canada, 2019: A Lens on Supply and Workforce (2020).

Khorsand v. Toronto Police Services Board
Collection
Decisions of the Court of Appeal
Date
2024-08-01
Neutral citation
2024 ONCA 597
Docket numbers
COA-23-CV-0665
Judges
Fairburn, J. Michal; Simmons, Janet M.; Daley, Peter A.
Subject
Civil
Decision Content
COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO
CITATION: Khorsand v. Toronto Police Services Board, 2024 ONCA 597
DATE: 20240801
DOCKET: COA-23-CV-0665
Fairburn A.C.J.O., Simmons J.A. and Daley J. (ad hoc)
BETWEEN
Yazdan Khorsand
Applicant (Respondent)
and
Toronto Police Services Board and Toronto Police Chief James Ramer
Respondents (Appellants)
Michele Brady and Rali Anguelova, for the appellants
Glen Chochla, for the respondent
Sharon Wilmot and Keegan Soles, for the intervener Ontario Association of Chiefs of Police
Jessica Barrow, for the intervener Canadian Association of Chiefs of Police
Saad Gaya, and Abby Deshman, for the intervener Canadian Civil Liberties Association
Nan Padmanathan and Steven Yu, for the intervener Community & Legal Aid Services Program
Robin Nobleman, Gabriel Reznick, Lisa Leinveer and Ryan Peck, for the interveners Mental Health Legal Committee/HIV & AIDS Legal Clinic Ontario/ARCH Disability Law Centre
Sujit Choudhry, Mani Kakkar and Danette Edwards, for the interveners South Asian Legal Clinic of Ontario/Black Legal Action Centre
Heard: March 4, 2024
On appeal from the order of the Divisional Court (Justices Harriet E. Sachs, Michael N. Varpio, dissenting, and Shaun O’Brien), dated February 27, 2023, with reasons reported at 2023 ONSC 1270, 166 O.R. (3d) 424, allowing an application for judicial review.
Fairburn A.C.J.O.:
A. OVERVIEW [1] The core issue to be determined in this appeal is whether a 2021 security screening decision made by the Toronto Police Service (“TPS”), at the request of the Toronto Community Housing Corporation (“TCHC”), in connection with Yazdan Khorsand’s application for employment as a special constable with the TCHC, is amenable to judicial review.
[2] Mr. Khorsand wishes to work in law enforcement. In 2020, he applied for a job as a special constable with the TCHC, a position he previously held before voluntarily leaving for another job. As part of the TCHC application process, Mr. Khorsand was required to pass a background investigation to be conducted by the TPS. In April 2021, Mr. Khorsand was advised that the TCHC was unable to move forward with his application because he “did not pass the pre-screen background check with TPS.”
[3] Mr. Khorsand asked both the TPS and the TCHC for information about why he failed the pre-screening process. He also made an access to information request to the TPS pursuant to the Municipal Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. M. 56 (“MFIPPA”). The disclosed records included reports relating to nine interactions between Mr. Khorsand and the TPS. None of the reports revealed any criminal behaviour on the part of Mr. Khorsand. Three reports described Mr. Khorsand as “Brown”, “Middle Eastern”, or “Persian”.
[4] Mr. Khorsand then brought an application for judicial review, challenging the TPS pre-screening decision and its decision not to disclose reasons or information relied upon in making that decision. Mr. Khorsand alleged those decisions violated the administrative law duty of procedural fairness. In response, the TPS Board and the Toronto Police Chief (the “appellants”), who were named in the application,[1] submitted that the pre-screening decision was made in the context of Mr. Khorsand’s attempt to secure employment with the TCHC and was therefore not of a sufficiently public character to be subject to judicial review.
[5] The Divisional Court decision was split.
[6] The majority concluded that judicial review was available. In their view, the decision to fail Mr. Khorsand at the pre-screening stage, which was made by the TPS as an agent of the TPS Board, was sufficiently public having regard to the factors set out in Air Canada v. Toronto Port Authority, 2011 FCA 347, [2013] 3 F.C.R. 605. Among other things, they noted that the TPS Board has the statutory power to appoint special constables and will not make an appointment unless the applicant passes a satisfactory background check. The majority also expressed concern about systemic discrimination in law enforcement institutions and police misuse of race-based data. They found that there is a public interest in ensuring that the unregulated use of police records does not result in the perpetuation of systemic discrimination.
[7] Having concluded that the pre-screening decision was subject to judicial review, the majority held that the TPS Board had breached its “minimal duty of fairness”. In the majority’s view, this duty required: (i) giving Mr. Khorsand notice of the reasons for why he had failed the pre-screening and copies of the information relied on in making that decision, subject to a process to protect sensitive law enforcement information; and (ii) an opportunity to dispute those reasons and information. The majority quashed the pre-screening decision and remitted it back to the TPS Board to be made in a “procedurally fair manner”.
[8] In contrast, the dissent concluded that the pre-screening decision was, at its core, a private decision and therefore not amenable to judicial review. The dissent recognized that even public decision makers may make private decisions. These non-reviewable private decisions include employment-related decisions, and the pre-screening decision was a component of an employment application process. The dissent also expressed concern about protecting highly confidential and sensitive law enforcement information from disclosure and the possibility that imposing public law remedies in this situation could open a floodgate of similar requests for information to the TPS Board and possibly other public sector actors.
[9] This court granted the appellants leave to appeal. The appellants submit that the majority erred in concluding that the pre-screening decision is judicially reviewable. In the alternative, they submit that if the decision is judicially reviewable, the Divisional Court defined the scope of the duty owed to Mr. Khorsand too generously. They also raise the issue of prematurity, given Mr. Khorsand’s failure to pursue an appeal of the MFIPPA decision, although counsel did not press this issue in oral argument.
[10] I would allow the appeal based on the first ground of appeal. As I will outline, the pre-screening decision was made by the TPS at the request of the TCHC as part of its hiring process. In my view, the pre-screening decision is not judicially reviewable because it is not of a sufficiently public character. In light of this conclusion, it is unnecessary to decide the other issues raised.
B. BACKGROUND (1) Mr. Khorsand’s personal and employment history (a) Mr. Khorsand [11] Mr. Khorsand immigrated to Canada from Iran in 2008. He self-identifies as a “person of colour.”
[12] Mr. Khorsand is now a Canadian citizen. He has no criminal record and has never been charged with a criminal offence.
[13] Mr. Khorsand wishes to work in law enforcement and has taken various courses to that end. In 2018, he graduated with honours from a basic special constable training program. Over time, he has applied for various positions in law enforcement that require successful background checks.
(b) Mr. Khorsand’s prior applications for employment and background checks [14] In 2017, Mr. Khorsand failed a background check conducted by the Ontario Provincial Police (“OPP”) in connection with his application for a job as a correctional services officer. He was not provided reasons for that failure.[2]
[15] Mr. Khorsand then turned his focus to the TCHC, where he applied to work as a special constable. In February 2018, after conducting all necessary background checks, the TCHC offered him employment as a “Special Constable in Training” for a 12-month probationary period. The offer and his continued employment with the TCHC was subject to conditions including him “becoming eligible for the Special Constable designation within [his] twelve (12) month probationary period.” Mr. Khorsand began working for the TCHC in March 2018. In November 2017, he had signed an authorization permitting the TPS to gather and consider his personal information to assess his qualifications and suitability for a special constable appointment. In April 2018, he successfully cleared the TPS background investigation.
[16] In July 2018, after about five months with the TCHC, the TPS Board, with the Solicitor General’s approval, appointed Mr. Khorsand as a special constable pursuant to s. 53 of the Police Services Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P. 15 (“PSA”). The record is silent as to whether the TPS Board knew when making the appointment that Mr. Khorsand had previously failed a background check conducted by the OPP. In any event, Mr. Khorsand was appointed for a five-year term on the condition that he remain employed with the TCHC.
[17] This takes us to August/September 2018, when Mr. Khorsand received a job offer from Metrolinx as a transit safety officer and he quit his job with the TCHC. His employment with Metrolinx was conditional on him attaining a special constable appointment. The OPP were responsible for conducting the necessary security clearance. In February 2019, Metrolinx informed Mr. Khorsand that he would not be recommended for appointment as a special constable because of “concerns” raised in the course of the OPP’s security clearance investigation. Accordingly, his employment with Metrolinx was terminated. Mr. Khorsand was not provided with any information about what had given rise to the “concerns”.
[18] In April 2019, after being dismissed from Metrolinx, Mr. Khorsand applied to be a police constable with the TPS. He was later notified that his application was unsuccessful and that he could not reapply until July 2020. He was given no reasons for why he was unsuccessful.
[19] In the meantime, in March 2019, Mr. Khorsand applied to rejoin the TCHC as a special constable. He was advised in December 2019 that he “did not pass the pre-screen civilian check” and, therefore, the application would not “move forward”.
(c) Mr. Khorsand’s employment application giving rise to challenged pre-screening decision [20] In July 2020, Mr. Khorsand again applied to be a special constable with the TCHC. Once again he signed an authorization allowing the TPS to gather and consider his personal information, including, but not limited to, opinions, reports, records, documents, academic records and transcripts, employment records, police records, background and security checks, financial records and driving records.
[21] In April 2021, the TCHC asked the TPS to conduct a “pre-screen background check.” The pre-screening process involves checking to see if there has been any recently conducted background investigations. In this case, it was determined that Mr. Khorsand had failed such an investigation in 2019. The results from that investigation were reviewed and it was determined that “no material change in circumstance had occurred since the 2019 background investigation had been completed.” Accordingly, Mr. Khorsand was informed that he “did not pass the pre-screen background check with TPS” and, therefore, his TCHC application could not proceed. As was later explained in a letter from the TPS to counsel for Mr. Khorsand during the course of this litigation, “[k]nowing that [Mr. Khorsand] would again be unsuccessful, [he] failed at the pre-screening stage and did not proceed to the next step of the background investigation process.”
(d) Mr. Khorsand’s requests for information [22] Having been informed that he failed the pre-screening and that his application could not proceed, Mr. Khorsand set about trying to obtain the records underlying the screening process, and the reasons why he failed. He asked the TPS and the TCHC for more information.
[23] In June 2021, Mr. Khorsand also submitted an access to information request to the TPS pursuant to MFIPPA. In July 2021, Mr. Khorsand was granted “partial access” to responsive records. Specifically, the TPS disclosed 66 pages of TPS records, involving 9 interactions with police. As previously noted, none of the TPS records disclosed any criminal behaviour by Mr. Khorsand and three of the nine incidents identified Mr. Khorsand as “Brown”, “Middle Eastern” or “Persian”. According to the TPS’s cover letter that accompanied the disclosure, the TPS withheld disclosure of certain records on the basis that: (1) their disclosure would constitute an unjustified invasion of another person’s privacy (MFIPPA, s. 14(1)(f) and s. 38(b)); and (2) the information had been collected as part of an investigation into a “possible violation of the law” (MFIPPA, s. 14(3)(b)). Some information was also removed because it was not responsive to Mr. Khorsand’s request. The letter also contained information about how Mr. Khorsand could pursue an appeal from the disclosure decision should he choose to do so. He never appealed.
[24] Around the same time, Mr. Khorsand’s counsel wrote to TPS counsel asking for information, including the reasons Mr. Khorsand had failed the pre-screening and “all documents in the [TPS’s] possession or control which formed the basis for the results of Mr. Khorsand’s background check.” The TPS refused to provide any information that had not already been provided pursuant to the MFIPPA request.
(2) The 2002 memorandum of understanding [25] It is important to understand the different roles played by the TCHC, the TPS Board, and the TPS in the hiring and appointment of TCHC special constables, as reflected in a 2002 memorandum of understanding between the TPS Board and the TCHC (the “MOU”).
[26] The MOU’s recitals recognize the respective roles of the TPS Board and the TCHC: the TPS Board is responsible for the provision of police services and law enforcement in the City of Toronto, and the TCHC is responsible for providing public housing in the City of Toronto. The recitals also recognize that the TPS and the TCHC had for many years cooperated “in law enforcement and security matters in relation to the property and operations of TCHC.”
[27] To that end, the TCHC has its own security services section that includes what the MOU refers to as “community patrol officers”. Those officers perform many of the duties of police officers in relation to TCHC properties, including enforcing various criminal and quasi-criminal statutes while working on TCHC properties. These statutes include the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, the Provincial Offences Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.33, the Mental Health Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. M.7, the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 1996, c. 19, the Trespass to Property Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. T.21, and the Liquor Licence Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.19. TCHC community patrol officers are also entrusted with highly sensitive police information, which may include CPIC and other criminal record information.[3] In order to be entrusted with these responsibilities and privileges, the community patrol officers must first be appointed as special constables. That is where the TPS Board comes in.
[28] The MOU recognizes that it is the TPS Board (with the approval of the Solicitor General) that has the statutory power to appoint special constables, which appointment may confer on the appointee the powers of a police officer “to the extent and for the specific purpose set out in the appointment.” At the relevant time, the power to appoint was governed by s. 53 of the PSA.[4] As set out in the MOU, it is up to the TCHC to put a candidate forward to the TPS Board for appointment, but this cannot be done until the TCHC, as the potential employer, has taken certain required steps.
[29] Pursuant to s. 17 of the MOU, the TCHC must conduct for each TCHC applicant, “at its own expense”, any background investigations or tests that the TPS Board may require for TPS applicants in order to determine that person’s suitability to fulfill the position of a community patrol officer. Then, pursuant to s. 18, it is up to the TCHC to forward to the TPS Board: (a) the results of the background checks and tests referred to in s. 17; (b) all completed waivers and consent forms signed by the applicant; and (c) written confirmation of the applicant’s “successful completion of” training required by the MOU. Pursuant to s. 14 of the MOU, the TCHC cannot put forward an applicant to the TPS Board for appointment unless the applicant: (1) is a full-time employee, which includes those employees on a probationary contract; (2) has successfully completed all TCHC training; and (3) has passed all screening conducted by or on behalf of the TCHC. In addition, pursuant to s. 15, the results of the applicant’s background investigation must be satisfactory to the TCHC for an applicant to be put forward for appointment by the TPS Board.
[30] Section 16 of the MOU says that the TPS Board “shall not appoint” a special constable if the results of background investigations or tests are “unsatisfactory to the Board, in its sole and unfettered discretion.” Furthermore, s. 13 of the MOU provides that both the TCHC and the TPS Board must be satisfied with the “good character, reputation, and suitability” of each applicant.
[31] In other words, the MOU contemplates that the TCHC, as the employer, is responsible for screening, training, and hiring, all of which happen before any application is made for a special constable appointment by the TPS Board.
[32] As for the role of the TPS, the MOU permits the TPS Board to delegate administrative functions (as opposed to decision making) to the Chief of Police, who may in turn delegate such functions to TPS officers: MOU, s. 4 and s. 6.
[33] While at first blush the MOU may seem somewhat complex, we have a very good example of how it works in practice. That example comes from when Mr. Khorsand succeeded in becoming a TCHC special constable in 2018.
[34] As set out above, in February 2018, the TCHC hired Mr. Khorsand as a “Special Constable in Training” after having satisfied itself that Mr. Khorsand was an appropriate candidate for employment as a TCHC special constable. His employment contract was conditional upon “becoming eligible for the Special Constable designation” within his twelve-month “probationary period.” In April 2018, he successfully cleared a TPS background investigation. The TCHC made a request for appointment, and in May 2018, the Chief of Police filed a report with the TPS Board recommending Mr. Khorsand for appointment as a TCHC special constable pursuant to s. 53 of the PSA. The Chief’s report noted that an appropriate background investigation was done, there was nothing precluding appointment, and that the TCHC had advised the TPS that Mr. Khorsand had satisfied the appointment criteria set out in the MOU. The Board, with the Solicitor General’s approval, then appointed Mr. Khorsand as a special constable for a five-year term with the TCHC.
(3) The nature of a background investigation [35] TPS Inspector David Ouellette swore an affidavit that the appellants tendered on the application for judicial review. In it, he explained the nature of background investigations conducted by the TPS. He was not cross-examined on his affidavit.
[36] Within the TPS, the Talent Acquisition Unit (“TAU”) is the unit that conducts background investigations for candidates of external community partners, such as the TCHC, who require a special constable appointment. The TAU also handles internal recruitment of police constables for the TPS. It is staffed by a host of current and retired police officers with investigative skills.
[37] Insp. Ouellette is responsible for the daily operations and oversight of all investigative files within the TAU. He deposed that a background investigation “is a comprehensive pre-employment screening process to determine an applicant’s suitability for a career in law enforcement or other job that involves accessing information contained in confidential records databases.” He described a background investigation as a security clearance that ensures that all prospective candidates meet the “level of professionalism, trustworthiness, and integrity that is required for a career in law enforcement.”
[38] The background investigation starts with the applicant signing an authorization, permitting the TPS to collect personal information, including opinions of others, reports, records, documents and all manner of employment, academic, police, financial, driving, and security information and records. In other words, a background investigation is comprehensive in nature, although according to Insp. Ouellette, the TAU does not access or rely on any information obtained through street checks.[5]
[39] The TAU cross-checks the information that it finds against the background investigative questionnaire completed by the applicant, which asks for detailed information about previous employment, education, driving record, criminal history, police contact, drug and alcohol use, and credit history.
[40] The TAU does not disclose the reasons for the result of a background investigation to an applicant or the information considered in conducting the background investigation. As Insp. Ouellette explained, this is for several reasons, including: (1) the records considered in the background investigation may include those of another police service or agency, and the TPS cannot disclose information for which it is not the custodian; (2) the information collected in the context of a background investigation may include highly confidential and sensitive information about third parties; and (3) disclosing content from a background investigation could jeopardize law enforcement investigative techniques and procedures and the integrity of the investigative process itself, thus creating safety concerns.
[41] According to Insp. Ouellette, in 2019, the TAU conducted more than 2,000 background investigations for internal candidates and candidates for external community partners such as the TCHC. That is an extraordinary number of background investigations. And that figure does not include background investigations conducted by other police services in Ontario.
C. DECISION APPEALED FROM (1) Majority decision (a) Application of the Air Canada factors [42] The majority characterized the pre-screening background check that stopped Mr. Khorsand’s application to the TCHC from proceeding as a decision of the TPS Board that was sufficiently public to be judicially reviewable pursuant to the Judicial Review Procedure Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. J.1. In reaching this conclusion, the majority applied the following eight factors from Air Canada:
▪ The character of the matter for which judicial review is sought
▪ The nature of the decision maker and its responsibilities
▪ The extent to which a decision is founded in and shaped by law as opposed to private discretion
▪ The body’s relationship to other statutory schemes or other parts of government
▪ The extent to which a decision maker is an agent of government or is directed, controlled, or significantly influenced by a public entity
▪ The suitability of public law remedies
▪ The existence of a compulsory power
▪ An exceptional category of cases where the conduct has attained a serious public dimension.
[43] The majority concluded that these factors pointed to the pre-screening decision being of a sufficiently public nature to attract a public law remedy.
Public character of the matter
[44] In considering the character of the pre-screening decision, the majority addressed the relevance of the MOU. Although the MOU is a private service agreement, it exists because of the public nature of the entities involved – the TPS Board and the TCHC – and the public nature of the duties they perform, namely the provision and policing of public housing. Significantly, the TPS Board has the statutory authority to appoint special constables (subject to the approval of the Solicitor General pursuant to s. 53 of the PSA), thereby granting special constables enhanced police powers, and the TPS Board will not make an appointment if there has been an unsatisfactory background investigation. The majority concluded that this factor weighed in favour of the public character of the decision in question.
Public nature of the decision maker
[45] As for the nature of the decision maker and its responsibilities, the majority emphasized that the TPS Board is a public body required to carry out public responsibilities under the PSA. Its core responsibility is to provide policing services to the City of Toronto. To fulfill that responsibility, the TPS Board may appoint special constables and a necessary part of the appointment process is the running of background checks. Accordingly, the pre-screening decision flows directly from the TPS Board’s core public responsibility to provide law enforcement. This factor also weighed in favour of the public character of the decision under review.
Decision shaped by law and not discretion
[46] The majority recognized that the decision in question is entirely discretionary: there were no statutory criteria for the appointment of special constables pursuant to s. 53 of the PSA.[6] Although that would appear to favour viewing the decision as private, the majority noted that the TPS Board’s discretion was not shaped by contract law or business considerations, and the decision has a potential effect on the human rights of a broad sector of the public.
Relationship to other parts of government & extent to which decision maker is an agent of government
[47] The majority concluded that this factor also points to the public nature of the decision. The TPS Board exists under statute, operates within a regulated system, and has overarching accountability through the Solicitor General. According to the majority, the TAU, which made the pre-screening decision, was acting as an agent of the TPS Board and, therefore, of the government when it made the decision in question.
Suitability of public law remedies
[48] In assessing the suitability of public law remedies, the majority again pointed to its concern about systemic discrimination. Specifically, the majority noted that absolute discretion may be abused in a way that affects the public at large and a public law remedy through judicial review may be the only available recourse.
Compulsory power
[49] The majority noted that although the TPS Board does not have any compulsory power over Mr. Khorsand as a member of the general public, and although Mr. Khorsand is not a member of a defined group, he must pass a background investigation with the TPS Board if he wants to be a special constable. In the majority’s view, it “could have a serious effect on the rights and interests of a broad segment of the public” to accept the argument that Mr. Khorsand could just pick another career.
Exceptional category
[50] Finally, the majority found that the matter fits within the “exceptional category” described in Air Canada. According to Air Canada, where a matter has a very serious, exceptional effect on the rights or interests of a broad segment of the public, it may be reviewable. Examples include “where the existence of fraud, bribery, corruption or a human rights violation transforms the matter from one of private significance to one of great public moment”: at para. 60.
[51] The majority accepted that this case raises an issue of systemic discrimination:
The Intervenor, the Canadian Civil Liberties Association, submits that, given that marginalized communities are subject to a higher frequency and degree of police interactions, the issue at the centre of these proceedings is a broader public issue that requires court supervision to ensure procedural fairness and natural justice. Without it, the systemic discrimination inherent in the gathering and use of police records will be allowed to proceed unchecked. This is a human rights issue that is of great public interest. Decisions not to hire racialized individuals because they had incidental interactions with the police shakes the public’s confidence in the law enforcement system and prevents an authentic representation of the local population within the ranks of the law enforcement services. I agree.
…
The data … confirms that racialized people in Toronto are highly over-represented in police contacts.
…
[O]ver-reliance on police record checks can have a disproportionate impact on racialized communities. In this case, Mr. Khorsand’s records disclose that his race was mentioned in the documentation on his police interactions, and they disclose nothing that would seem to be of concern when hiring him for a job in law enforcement. This raises serious questions about what information was relied on in coming to the conclusion that he failed his background check and how systemic issues may have informed and affected the TPSB’s decision-making on this issue.
[52] The majority therefore found that the decision under review affects not only Mr. Khorsand’s rights but also affects public confidence in the representativeness of agencies who administer law enforcement. In the words of the majority, “[t]here is a serious public interest in ensuring that the unregulated use of police records does not result in the perpetuation of systemic discrimination.”
(b) Nature of duty owed [53] Having found the matter to be public in nature, the majority turned its attention to the content of the duty of procedural fairness in this case. After considering the factors from Baker v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [1999] 2 S.C.R. 817, the majority concluded that the Board owed, at a minimum, a duty to provide its reasons for failing Mr. Khorsand along with copies of the information it relied upon in making that determination, “subject to a process to protect sensitive law enforcement information”, and an opportunity to dispute those reasons and information.
[54] As for the disposition, the majority quashed the TPS Board’s finding that Mr. Khorsand had failed his background investigation at the pre-screening stage and remitted the matter back to the TPS Board to be made in a procedurally fair manner.
(2) Dissent [55] The dissent disagreed that the matter was judicially reviewable. Relying on case law affirming that hiring decisions by public entities are private in nature, he concluded that the pre-screening decision in this case is part and parcel of the hiring process and thus private in nature. I will discuss this case law later in these reasons.
[56] In the alternative, the dissent went through each of the Air Canada factors, concluding that the pre-screening decision was private and thus not judicially reviewable. The dissent saw the employment relationship and, indeed, the act of hiring staff as private in nature. Relying on the evidence of Insp. Ouellette, he strongly disagreed that public law remedies were suitable in this case. He spent some time explaining how the disclosure of the content of the records, or even having to state that there would be no disclosure of the records, could compromise investigative techniques and procedures and endanger confidential informants. As well, he noted the floodgate that could open if these types of security screening decisions were subjected to judicial review.
[57] Finally, the dissent was not prepared to find that this case fell within the Air Canada “exceptional category”. He concluded that there was no evidence of racism having played a role in the failed background check in this case. He also took judicial notice of the fact that the three racial descriptors found in the records that were disclosed under MFIPPA reflected common practice in police records. Moreover, Mr. Khorsand had failed to fully pursue his MFIPPA appeal rights, something that could be fatal to judicial review. If the evidence produced in an MFIPPA request revealed a human rights violation, Mr. Khorsand could go before the Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario, which has jurisdiction over such matters.
D. positions of the parties [58] According to the appellants, the majority erred in their analysis of the Air Canada factors, which point away from the availability of judicial review. In their view, this is strictly an employment matter; there is no principled way to separate out the pre-screening decision from the ultimate hiring decision, which is not subject to judicial review. The appellants also emphasize that the entirely discretionary pre-screening decision arises from a private agreement (the MOU). Furthermore, public law remedies are not suitable, given the difficulty of maintaining the integrity and security of information, records, and individuals, who may include confidential informants, if the Board is required to explain its reasons for failing a person. The appellants also submit that this case does not fall within the “exceptional category” – a potential, unproven human rights violation cannot render an employment-related decision subject to judicial review. If an applicant believes that the outcome of their background investigation resulted from discrimination, the proper forum for raising that claim is the Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario.
[59] In contrast, Mr. Khorsand submits that the majority was right to find that the pre-screening decision is judicially reviewable. He contends that the majority correctly applied the Air Canada factors. The decision maker – the TPS Board, as represented by its agent, the TAU – is indisputably a public entity and its decision on the pre-screening emanates from the TPS Board’s statutory power to appoint special constables. The decision to fail an individual on a background investigation is not a mere hiring decision; the effect of such a decision is to render it impossible for the individual to pursue a career in law enforcement.
[60] Mr. Khorsand also maintains that public law remedies are entirely suitable in this case and that the redaction of documents for security purposes is not a new or insurmountable concern. Furthermore, given the caselaw on systemic racial discrimination in Canadian society and the references to Mr. Khorsand’s race in his police files, there is sufficient evidence of racial discrimination to say that the “exceptional category” under Air Canada is engaged.
[61] This court also had the benefit of submissions from seven interveners, who provided valuable insights into the implications of the Divisional Court’s decision. On the one hand, the Canadian Association of Chiefs of Police and the Ontario Association of Chiefs of Police expressed concern about the administrative burden the majority’s decision will place on police and stressed the need to safeguard sensitive law enforcement information. On the other hand, the remaining interveners submitted that a failure to uphold the majority’s decision will have on a negative impact on a variety of groups, including low-income communities, those living with disabilities, and racialized individuals, because there will be no means to guard against discrimination creeping into the special constable appointment process.
E. The Standard of Review [62] As previously noted, I would resolve this appeal on the first issue: whether the pre-screening decision is amenable to judicial review. I agree with the parties that the standard of appellate review on this issue is correctness. Whether the pre-screening decision is subject to review by the courts is a question of law that engages principles of judicial review that must give rise to a single, correct answer.
F. The legal framework (1) Wall and the availability of judicial review [63] The purpose of judicial review is to ensure the legality of state decision making: Highwood Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses (Judicial Committee) v. Wall, 2018 SCC 26, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 750, at para. 13. It is a public law concept that allows s. 96 courts[7] to “engage in surveillance” of administrative decision makers to ensure that they respect the rule of law: Wall, at para. 13, citing Knox v. Conservative Party of Canada, 2007 ABCA 295, 422 A.R. 29, at para. 14, leave to appeal refused, [2007] S.C.C.A. No. 567.
[64] In Wall, the Supreme Court confirmed that judicial review is available only where two conditions are met: (1) there is an “exercise of state authority”; and (2) that exercise of state authority is of a “sufficiently public character”: para. 14. In setting out these requirements, Rowe J. explained that even public bodies make some decisions that are private in nature and thus not subject to judicial review: at para. 14.
[65] These two requirements have been helpfully explored in an article by Professor Derek McKee: “The Boundaries of Judicial Review Since Highwood Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses v. Wall” (2021) 47:1 Queen’s L.J. 112 (“The Boundaries of Judicial Review”). In this article, Professor McKee reads Wall as imposing both an institutional criterion (“identity of the decision maker”) and a functional criterion (the decision must be “public” in nature) in determining whether a decision is subject to judicial review. He suggests the following, at p. 117:
[Rowe J.] appears to set out two requirements. The first is an institutional criterion, related to the identity of the decision maker. Justice Rowe writes that “judicial review is aimed at government decision makers. He is at pains to distinguish decisions made by “public bodies” or “the administrative state” from those made by “private bodies” or “voluntary associations”. The second is a functional criterion. Justice Rowe emphasizes that the decision in question must be public as well. He notes that “[e]ven public bodies make some decisions that are private in nature—such as renting premises and hiring staff—and such decisions are not subject to judicial review.” This structure implies a two-part test: the judge must characterize the institution in question and then characterize the function; if either of these is private, judicial review is excluded. [Footnotes omitted; emphasis added.]
[66] In other words, it is not enough that the decision maker is public – the decision in question must also be sufficiently public.
(2) Applicability of the Air Canada factors post-Wall [67] Prior to Wall, this court applied the Air Canada factors in determining whether a decision was subject to judicial review: see Setia v. Appleby College, 2013 ONCA 753, 118 O.R. (3d) 481. Since Wall, legal commentators have expressed different views on whether the Air Canada factors have any continuing applicability in determining whether a decision is judicially reviewable outside of the Federal Court’s distinctive statutory context, which Rowe J. noted is what the factors “actually dealt with”: Wall, at para. 21.
[68] For example, Professor Paul Daly has stated that Wall gave Air Canada a “narrow interpretation” and so “potentially deprived Canadian courts of a very useful set of factors… to perform the difficult task of separating ‘public’ from ‘private’ matters”: “Right and Wrong on the Scope of Judicial Review: Highwood Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses (Judicial Committee) v Wall” (2018) 31 Can. J. Admin. L. & Prac. 339, at p. 343.
[69] Lawyer Mannu Chowdhury has written that Wall could also be interpreted as overturning Air Canada: “A Wall Between the ‘Public’ and the ‘Private’: A Comment on Highwood Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses (Judicial Committee) v Wall” (2019) 9:2 Western J. of Leg. Studies 1, at p. 17. Either way, he says, Air Canada has been undermined.
[70] Prof. McKee describes Wall’s treatment of Air Canada as “ambivalent”: “The Boundaries of Judicial Review”, at p. 130. He explains, at p. 130:
On the one hand, a generous reading might suggest that Rowe J implicitly endorses the use of the Air Canada factors as part of the second step in the public/private analysis… Justice Rowe certainly says nothing that would directly negate such a reading. On the other hand, Rowe J does not explicitly endorse Air Canada. In his reference to the case, Rowe J implies that Stratas JA’s analysis was limited to determining whether the TPA had been acting as a “federal board, commission or other tribunal” for the purposes of the Federal Courts Act. Such a reading would in principle limit Air Canada’s application to the federal courts. [Footnote omitted; emphasis added.]
[71] Lawyer Robert Boissonneault, in his article “Wall at Five: A Cautious Defence and a Way Forward”, 36 Can. J. Admin. L. & Prac. 199, at p. 216, suggests that the Air Canada factors may remain relevant in determining whether the nature of a public body’s decision is sufficiently public to be reviewable:
[T]o the extent that the Court in Wall rejected the Air Canada test, it did so in the interest of precluding judicial review of private institutions. However, Air Canada may still aid in determining whether the decision of a public institution is sufficiently public to sustain judicial review. [Emphasis in original.]
[72] Courts have also diverged in their approaches. Some decisions make no mention of the Air Canada factors, some employ them as a supplement, especially in relation to Wall’s functional criterion, and others, like the Divisional Court’s majority decision below, rely more heavily on them.[8]
[73] In my view, Wall does not preclude reference to the Air Canada factors in teasing out why, at a minimum, the functional criterion is or is not met when determining whether a decision is public or not. In this regard, I agree with what the British Columbia Court of Appeal had to say in Strauss v. North Fraser Pretrial Centre (Deputy Warden of Operations), 2019 BCCA 207, 25 B.C.L.R. (6th) 169, at para. 42:
In the end, the [Air Canada] factors are merely guidelines in deciding whether a decision made by a public official or tribunal has a sufficiently public character to be amenable to judicial review. Some will be applicable and important in particular contexts while, in those contexts, others may be irrelevant and unhelpful.
[74] In other words, to the extent they have continuing relevance, the Air Canada factors do not operate as a strict test or checklist. In my view, they simply play a helpful role in focusing the court’s attention and reasoning process, especially when analyzing the second criterion from Wall. Indeed, in Air Canada itself, Stratas J.A. acknowledged that “[w]hether or not any one factor or a combination of particular factors tips the balance and makes a matter ‘public’ depends on the facts of the case and the overall impression registered upon the Court”: at para. 60.
[75] This is all subject to one important caveat. Wall cautions against using the Air Canada factors to transform a private decision into a public one on the basis that a decision impacts or is of significant interest to a broad segment of the public. Rowe J. said the following, at paras. 20-21:
The problem with the cases that rely on Setia is that they hold that where a decision has a broad public impact, the decision is of a sufficient public character and is therefore reviewable: Graff [v. New Democratic Party, 2017 ONSC 3578, 28 Admin. L.R. (6th) 294 (Div. Ct.)], at para. 18; West Toronto United Football Club [v. Ontario Soccer Association, 2014 ONSC 5881, 327 O.A.C. 29 (Div. Ct.)], at para. 24. These cases fail to distinguish between “public” in a generic sense and “public” in a public law sense. In my view, a decision will be considered to be public where it involves questions about the rule of law and the limits of an administrative decision maker’s exercise of power. Simply because a decision impacts a broad segment of the public does not mean that it is public in the administrative law sense of the term. Again, judicial review is about the legality of state decision making.
…
The proposition that private decisions of a public body will not be subject to judicial review does not make the inverse true. Thus it does not follow that "public" decisions of a private body – in the sense that they have some broad import – will be reviewable. The relevant inquiry is whether the legality of state decision making is at issue. [Emphasis added.]
[76] This passage makes clear that it is wrong to apply the Air Canada factors to transform the decision of a private actor – such as a church, sports club, or other voluntary association – into a public decision. In my view, the passage also cautions against characterizing a decision of a public body as public in function simply because a broad segment of the public may be interested in or impacted by it. For instance, a government decision to enter into a contract to purchase property may be of significant interest to, and have an impact on, a broad segment of a community; however, that would not transform the contractual decision into a public one. In other words, it is important to distinguish between “public” in the generic sense and “public” in the sense that the legality of state decision making is at play.
G. discussion [77] I am not persuaded that the pre-screening decision is sufficiently public to render it reviewable. I say this for three principal reasons.
(1) The pre-screening was part and parcel of the TCHC’s hiring process [78] Although Wall does not spell out in detail how to determine whether a decision of a public body is sufficiently public, it does suggest some dividing lines between decisions that are private and those that are public. For instance, Rowe J. gives examples of private decisions by public bodies. Notably, one example he gives, at para. 14, is hiring staff:
Even public bodies make some decisions that are private in nature – such as renting premises and hiring staff – and such decisions are not subject to judicial review: Air Canada v. Toronto Port Authority, 2011 FCA 347, [2013] 3 F.C.R. 605, at para. 52. In making these contractual decisions, the public body is not exercising "a power central to the administrative mandate given to it by Parliament", but is rather exercising a private power (ibid.). Such decisions do not involve concerns about the rule of law insofar as this refers to the exercise of delegated authority. [Emphasis added.]
[79] Rowe J. borrows the example of hiring staff from Air Canada, at para. 52. In turn, Air Canada built on the Supreme Court’s decision in Dunsmuir v. New Brunswick, 2008 SCC 9, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 190, where the court held that the dismissal of civil servants, employed under contract, should be governed by contract law, not administrative law. As the majority noted in that decision, “in the specific context of dismissal from public employment, disputes should be viewed through the lens of contract law rather than public law”: at para. 82.
[80] With respect, I do not agree with the majority below that the “decision to fail Mr. Khorsand at the background check stage was a separate and distinct decision” from the hiring decision. Instead, I see the pre-screening decision as part and parcel of the TCHC’s hiring process – a process that is not judicially reviewable.
[81] As previously discussed, ss. 14-15 of the MOU oblige the TCHC – the actual employer of TCHC special constables – to satisfy itself of a community patrol officer applicant’s suitability before it can advance that person for appointment as a special constable. Indeed, the TCHC must already have hired the person, trained them, and ensured that "all screening tests” have been conducted “by or on behalf of the TCHC” at its own expense, before it may even put the individual forward “to the Board for appointment as a special constable.” Under s. 15 of the MOU, the TCHC “shall not put forward to the Board an applicant for appointment as Special Constable” where the TCHC is not satisfied with “the results of the background investigations.” In other words, the pre-screening decision was made by the TAU at the request of the TCHC as part of its hiring process.
[82] The TPS Board had no involvement in the pre-screening stage. Although under s. 16 of the MOU, the TPS Board “shall not appoint” a special constable if the results of the background investigations are “unsatisfactory to the Board”, the TPS Board is not confronted with making a s. 53 decision until after the potential candidate has become an employee of the TCHC. Of course, that does not happen until the TCHC has decided that the person is a suitable candidate to work for the TCHC as a special constable. In making that decision, the TCHC will clearly have an eye to whether the individual could achieve special constable status. Nonetheless, the fact remains that it is the TCHC, as an employer, that is making a hiring decision at a stage before the TPS Board’s involvement. In the context of that hiring decision, the TCHC – as the ultimate employer – will want assurances that any candidate for the position has the level of professionalism, trustworthiness, and integrity that is required for that job. Although the TPS Board will also consider those same qualities, should the TCHC ultimately hire the person and put them forward for appointment as a special constable, the original hiring decision is that of the TCHC and is inextricably linked to the TCHC’s view on whether the candidate can properly execute their law enforcement responsibilities. That hiring decision is informed by the pre-screening and screening decisions that take place long before the Board is involved in its decision-making capacity.
[83] Therefore, my view contrasts with that of the majority below, which saw the TAU as acting solely “as an agent of the [TPS Board]” in making the pre-screening decision, a decision “emanat[ing] directly from [the TPS Board’s] power to appoint Special Constables.” Although the TPS Board may delegate administrative functions to the TAU pursuant to the MOU, it may not delegate its decision-making power under s. 53 of the PSA. I do not see the TAU’s pre-screening decision as emanating directly from the TPS Board’s s. 53 authority. Rather, consistent with the terms of the MOU, the TAU was conducting pre-screening in support of the TCHC’s hiring process, a process that preceded the appointment process, and one that was done by the TPS as part of its operational functions in the context of the TCHC hiring process.
[84] In conclusion, I see the pre-screening decision as a discretionary employment-related decision, which draws it within the private sphere.
(2) The decision’s impact on a broad segment of the public does not transform it from a private decision into a public decision [85] A theme woven through the majority’s analysis below is their concern about the potential impact of the pre-screening decision on a large segment of the public.
[86] The majority first flagged this concern in their overview, where they noted that “[t]here is a serious public interest in ensuring that the unregulated use of police records does not result in the perpetuation of systemic discrimination.”
[87] They continued weaving their concern about the public impact of the pre-screening throughout their analysis. For instance, even though they acknowledged the discretionary nature of the decision, which pushed it towards being private, they added a “however” – the decision, which is not shaped by contract law or business considerations, has a potential impact on the human rights of a broad section of the public.
[88] When it came to considering the suitability of public law remedies, the majority again noted that “[a]bsolute discretion may be abused” in a way that impacts not only the individuals involved but the “public at large.”
[89] The majority also expressed concern about the decision’s impact on the public in finding that this matter fell within the “exceptional category” from Air Canada. They accepted that “the systemic discrimination inherent in the gathering and use of police records … is a human rights issue that is of great public interest.” They also accepted that “[d]ecisions not to hire racialized individuals because they had incidental interactions with the police” could shake “the public’s confidence in the law enforcement system and prevent an authentic representation of the local population within the ranks of the law enforcement services.”
[90] In my view, these concerns cannot transform a discretionary employment-related decision into a public decision. To do so is inconsistent with Wall’s instruction that “[s]imply because a decision impacts a broad segment of the public does not mean that it is public.”
[91] I wish to be very clear that this is not to ignore the majority’s concern about the need to safeguard against systemic discrimination in law enforcement. It is an indisputable fact that, as the Supreme Court has recognized, “[m]embers of racial minorities have disproportionate levels of contact with the police and the criminal justice system” and that carding “impacts [an individual’s] ability to pursue employment and education opportunities”: R. v. Le, 2019 SCC 34, [2019] 2 S.C.R. 692, at paras. 90, 95.
[92] The majority makes specific reference to the problem of carding in discussing their concern about systemic discrimination. However, in raising that issue, the majority did not address the unchallenged and uncontradicted evidence of Insp. Ouellette that, in conducting background checks, the TAU does not access or rely on any information obtained through carding or street checks.
[93] Even so, the majority’s concern about systemic discrimination extends beyond carding. The majority talks more broadly about the “systemic discrimination inherent in the gathering and use of police records.” Before this court, counsel for the Black Legal Action Centre and the South Asian Legal Clinic of Ontario submitted that the police database used by the TPS is, at its core, “tainted by systemic racial discrimination arising from the over-policing of racialized persons”. The interveners ask this court to take judicial notice that police record databases are inherently and irretrievably tainted by racial discrimination and, therefore, any hiring decision based upon the use of that record system is inherently suspect.
[94] In my view, that is an extraordinary proposition and one that would require an evidentiary foundation for support. On the record before this court, there is simply no evidence to support the proposition that the entire TPS police record database is tainted, giving rise to a presumption that the results of any background investigation based upon those records are inherently suspect: see generally Le, at paras. 84-85.
[95] In expressing a concern about racial discrimination, the majority below also relied on the fact that Mr. Khorsand’s race was documented in three of the TPS records that were disclosed to him pursuant to MFIPPA. These references, combined with the fact the records disclosed “nothing that would seem to be of concern when hiring him” were enough, in the majority’s view, to give rise to “serious questions about what information was relied on in coming to the conclusion that [Mr. Khorsand] failed his background check and how systemic issues may have informed and affected the TPS [Board’s] decision-making on this issue.”
[96] Although I accept that race-based data can certainly be misused, I question the inference drawn by the majority, namely that there is strong reason to believe there was racial discrimination at play in this case. The majority’s inference is built, in part, on the absence of any reason for concern in the disclosed records. This ignores the fact that only partial disclosure of TPS records was provided under MFIPPA, and it is entirely possible that the reason for failing Mr. Khorsand was not based on anything contained in TPS records or the 66 pages of records that were disclosed.
[97] I also question an assumption underlying the majority’s inference: that the collection of race-based data is more likely than not nefarious. That is not always the case. Indeed, reliable reports that have examined the collection of race-based data in the police context have concluded that it is not only permissible, but indeed desirable to collect such data. In the Report of the Independent Police Oversight Review (Queen’s Printer for Ontario, 2017), at p. 245, Justice Tulloch (as he then was) concluded that “[a]cademics and policy makers are now nearly unanimous in their support for the collection of demographic data”. Similarly, a recent independent review of the TPS’ race-based data collection policies explains that “race-based data collection can provide measurable evidence to address inequities, racism, and discriminatory practices”: Dr. Lorne Foster and Dr. Les Jacobs, Independent Expert Assessment Report: Toronto Police Service Race-Based Data Collection Strategy Phase I (2022), at p. 3. See also: Ontario Human Rights Commission, From Impact to Action: Final Report into Anti-Black Racism by the Toronto Police Service (2023).[9] Clearly, the proper collection of race-based data by police can serve salutary, non-discriminatory goals.
[98] Therefore, on the record before this court, it cannot be said that the existence of a human rights violation is evident or that it transforms a discretionary employment-related decision into a public decision.
(3) Public law remedies are not suitable [99] Finally, I share the opinion of the dissent about the suitability of public remedies.
[100] As previously noted, the dissent was particularly concerned about the protection of sensitive law enforcement information. The majority made clear that the requirement to give reasons and disclose documents to Mr. Khorsand was “subject to a process to protect sensitive law enforcement information.” While the majority clearly attempted to address the concern about the protection of sensitive law enforcement information, respectfully, their approach falls short in the sense that the carveout is vague and does not resolve the problems about the suitability of public remedies.
[101] There is a reason that there are sophisticated statutory schemes pertaining to the disclosure of records, such as MFIPPA and the Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. F. 31. They are well thought out, sophisticated and sensitive statutory schemes that take into account multiple interests. For instance, MFIPPA has 54 sections and is supplemented by two regulations. Its purposes are set out in s. 1 of the Act:
The purposes of this Act are,
(a) to provide a right of access to information under the control of institutions in accordance with the principles that,
(i) information should be available to the public,
(ii) necessary exemptions from the right of access should be limited and specific, and
(iii) decisions on the disclosure of information should be reviewed independently of the institution controlling the information; and
(b) to protect the privacy of individuals with respect to personal information about themselves held by institutions and to provide individuals with a right of access to that information.
[102] In this case, Mr. Khorsand was granted partial disclosure to TPS records pursuant to his MFIPPA request; he did not appeal from that decision. In refusing to grant full disclosure, the TPS relied on MFIPPA exemptions that go beyond those pertaining to sensitive law enforcement information (ss. 14(1)(f) and s. 38(b)).
[103] The majority ordered disclosure, subject only to an undefined process to protect sensitive law enforcement information. This potentially puts the TPS in a bind. If the basis of the TPS’s decision is found in records that were withheld from disclosure based on exemptions unrelated to the protection of sensitive law enforcement information, the TPS may be forced to disclose records not disclosable pursuant to MFIPPA.
[104] I also share the dissent’s view that even requiring the TPS to state that it refuses to disclose records because of investigative concerns could be problematic. Not only could such a requirement inadvertently compromise sensitive law enforcement information, but it is also inconsistent with s. 8(3) of MFIPPA, which states that “[a] head may refuse to confirm or deny the existence of a record” covered by the law enforcement exemption.
[105] If a person who is not hired to work with the TCHC as a community patrol officer can now have access to information that far exceeds what they could obtain under MFIPPA, the potential conflict with MFIPPA is obvious.
[106] And, completely separately, affording a public law remedy here could chill the ability to conduct a proper background investigation.
[107] The focus of the majority’s reasons below is on the disclosure of pre-existing records contained in police databases, even those over which the police service has no control. It is important to keep in mind though that background investigations can extend well beyond information contained in police databases. Indeed, those applying for a position with TCHC must sign an authorization allowing the TPS to conduct a background investigation that extends well beyond police databases. For instance, in this very case, Mr. Khorsand signed an authorization that permitted any person or organization in receipt of it to provide disclosure of information about him to the Toronto Police Service, including the conveying of “opinions” that they may have.
[108] This is akin to a more classic job reference check and something that may be recorded in the notes of the person conducting the check. If such notes informed the reason for Mr. Khorsand’s failure, the majority’s reasons dictate that the notes would have to be disclosed. In my view, that would place a chill on receiving honest and objective feedback about a potential TCHC community patrol officer.
[109] This all comes back to the point that an initial background investigation is done for purposes of making a hiring decision, a process that is not susceptible to public law remedies and one that would be rendered vulnerable were it to become susceptible to judicial review.
H. Conclusion [110] For these reasons, I would allow the appeal, quash the order of the Divisional Court, and dismiss the application for judicial review.
[111] No costs were ordered below. No party sought costs before this court, and I would order no costs for this appeal.
Released: “August 1, 2024 JMF”
“Fairburn A.C.J.O.”
“I agree. Janet Simmons J.A.”
“I agree. Daley J. (ad hoc)”
[1] The application initially named the TPS and the TPS Board. The application was later amended to replace the TPS with the then TPS Chief of Police. Although the Toronto Chief of Police is named in the notice of application, there are no specific allegations made against him.
[2] There is no reference to this failure in the Divisional Court’s reasons.
[3] CPIC is a database maintained by the RCMP which contains highly sensitive police records.
[4] The PSA was repealed effective April 1, 2024 and replaced with the Community Safety and Policing Act, 2019, S.O. 2019, c. 1, Sch. 1. As s. 53 of the PSA was in operation at the time of the decision in dispute in this case, these reasons focus upon that provision.
[5] Background investigations are much broader than more typical record checks that are governed by the Police Record Checks Reform Act, 2015, S.O. 2015, c. 30 (the “PRCRA”). The PRCRA, which was proclaimed into force on November 1, 2018, governs searches of CPIC and other police databases conducted for the purpose of determining a person’s suitability for things such as employment and volunteering. In enacting the PRCRA, the legislature chose to exempt certain types of searches from the Act, including “prescribed” searches. Such “prescribed” exempted searches include searches of CPIC for the purpose of screening a person for a special constable appointment: Exemptions, O. Reg. 347/18, s. 5(1)1(v). (But see ss. 0.2 to 0.4 which impose some “conditions of disclosure” on exempted searches.)
[6] This has changed under the new s. 92 of the Community Safety and Policing Act, which includes eligibility criteria for the appointment of special constables.
[7] “Section 96 courts” refers to courts whose judges are appointed pursuant to s. 96 of the Constitution Act, 1867.
[8] For examples of the first category, see: Bell v. Civil Air Search and Rescue Association, 2018 MBCA 96, 81 B.L.R. (5th) 1; Evans v. Norway House Fisherman’s Co-Op Ltd et al, 2020 MBCA 83; Mathai v. George, 2019 ABQB 116, 89 Alta. L.R. (6th) 305; and Sivanadian v. Kanagaratnam, 2020 ONSC 6760 (Div. Ct.). For examples of the second, see: Quewezance v. Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations, 2018 SKQB 313, 44 C.P.C. (8th) 189; Finkle v. NSHA, 2023 NSSC 426; Perron v. Health PEI, 2024 PESC 22. For the third, see: Sioui v. Huron-Wendat Nation Council, 2023 FC 1731; Astro Zodiac Enterprises Ltd. v. Board of Governors of Exhibition Place, 2022 ONSC 1175 (Div. Ct.).
[9] The House of Commons Standing Committee on Public Safety and National Security has also recommended that the Royal Canadian Mounted Police “collect and publicize comprehensive and disaggregated race-based data covering police interactions with the public”: Systemic Racism in Policing in Canada: Report of the Standing Committee on Public Safety and National Security (2021), at p. 72.

Imperial Oil Limited v. Haseeb
Collection
Decisions of the Court of Appeal
Date
2023-05-23
Neutral citation
2023 ONCA 364
Docket numbers
C70037
Judges
van Rensburg, Katherine; Sossin, Lorne; Copeland, Jill M.
Subject
Civil
Decision Content
COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO
CITATION: Imperial Oil Limited v. Haseeb, 2023 ONCA 364
DATE: 20230523
DOCKET: C70037
van Rensburg, Sossin and Copeland JJ.A.
BETWEEN
Imperial Oil Limited
Applicant (Respondent)
and
Muhammad Haseeb and the Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario
Respondents (Appellant/Respondent)
Toby G. Young and Megan Evans Maxwell, for the appellant
Richard Nixon and Duncan Burns-Shillington, for the respondent Imperial Oil Limited
Brian A. Blumenthal, for the respondent Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario
Sujit Choudhry and Arash Nayerahmadi, for the interveners the South Asian Legal Clinic of Ontario and the Colour of Poverty/Colour of Change Network
Heard: November 24, 2022
On appeal from the order of the Divisional Court (Justices Thomas R. Lederer, Graeme Mew, and Harriet E. Sachs, dissenting), dated June 1, 2021, with reasons reported at 2021 ONSC 3868, granting an application for judicial review of the decisions of the Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario, dated July 20, 2018, with reasons reported at 2018 HRTO 957, dated February 14, 2019, with reasons reported at 2019 HRTO 271, and dated August 23, 2019, with reasons reported at 2019 HRTO 1174.
Table of Contents
A. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND. [1]
(1) The appellant’s status in Canada and eligibility to work. [5]
(2) The hiring process. [10]
(3) The withdrawal of the offer [13]
(4) The human rights claim.. [16]
(5) The tribunal decision. [19]
(6) The Divisional Court decision. [23]
B. GROUNDS OF APPEAL AND ADDITIONAL ISSUES RAISED BY THE RESPONDENT. [30]
C. SUMMARY OF MY CONCLUSIONS. [34]
D. STANDARD OF REVIEW.. [37]
E. RELEVANT PRINCIPLES OF ANALYSIS OF DISCRIMINATION CLAIMS UNDER HUMAN RIGHTS LEGISLATION. [49]
(1) Elements of a claim of discrimination under human rights legislation. [50]
(2) The burden of proof and the shifting evidential burdens. [52]
(3) Direct versus adverse impact discrimination. [56]
(4) Partial discrimination is still discrimination. [67]
F. WAS THE TRIBUNAL’S LIABILITY DECISION REASONABLE?. [70]
(1) Was the tribunal’s decision that the appellant had standing to file an application claiming discrimination in employment on the basis of citizenship reasonable?. [72]
(2) Was the tribunal’s finding of a prima facie claim of employment discrimination on the basis of citizenship reasonable?. [99]
(3) Was the tribunal’s finding that Imperial withdrew the job offer because the appellant was not a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident, rather than solely because of his dishonesty in the job competition, reasonable?. [200]
(4) Was the tribunal’s decision that the defence under s. 16(1) of the Code was not available to Imperial reasonable?. [225]
G. CONCLUSION. [239]
Copeland J.A.:
A. Introduction and Background [1] The appellant appeals from the decision of the Divisional Court, which set aside the decision of the Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario (the “tribunal”) finding that the respondent (“Imperial”) discriminated against him in employment on the basis of citizenship.
[2] Ontario’s Human Rights Code, R.S.O. 1990, c. H.19 (the “Code”), prohibits discrimination in employment on the basis of citizenship. In the time period relevant to this appeal, the appellant was not a Canadian citizen or permanent resident (he has since become a Canadian citizen). He was an international student in Canada about to graduate with a mechanical engineering degree. As a matter of federal immigration law, upon graduation, he would be entitled to a Post-Graduate Work Permit (“PGWP”), which would allow him to work full-time, anywhere in Canada, for any employer, for up to three years. This entitlement forms part of a scheme of immigration legislation and regulation designed to attract skilled workers to settle in Canada, become permanent residents, and ultimately, Canadian citizens.
[3] During his last semester of university, the appellant applied for an entry-level engineering job with Imperial. Imperial had a policy that required, as a condition of employment, permanent eligibility to work in Canada, as established by proof of either Canadian citizenship or permanent resident status. The appellant was the top candidate for the job. Imperial offered him the job, conditional on permanent eligibility to work in Canada, as established by proof of either Canadian citizenship or permanent resident status. When the appellant disclosed that he was neither a Canadian citizen nor a permanent resident, and would have to initially work on the three-year PGWP, Imperial withdrew its job offer.
[4] For reasons I explain below, I conclude that the tribunal’s decision that Imperial discriminated against the appellant on the basis of citizenship was reasonable. I would allow the appeal and restore the tribunal’s order.
(1) The appellant’s status in Canada and eligibility to work [5] In the fall of 2014, the appellant was a student in his final semester of a mechanical engineering degree at McGill University. He was scheduled to complete his studies in December 2014, and to formally graduate in January 2015.
[6] The appellant was, at that time, a citizen of Pakistan. He was in Canada on a student visa. Upon graduation from his university program, he would be eligible for a PGWP for a period of three years. The appellant’s entitlement to a PGWP was conditional only on his providing a letter from the university attesting to the completion of his degree. The PGWP would permit him to work full-time, for any employer, anywhere in Canada. That is, it would give him an unrestricted right to work in Canada, subject only to the three-year time limit.
[7] The PGWP program is part of a federal immigration program aimed at attracting international students to attend Canadian universities and colleges, in order to provide a source of skilled labour to Canada. The PGWP program is designed as a pathway to Canadian citizenship.[1] It has three stages. First, while an international student is still in school, federal immigration law permits them to work up to 20 hours per week during academic sessions, and full-time during scheduled breaks in academic sessions. Second, once an international student, like the appellant, graduates, they are eligible for a PGWP, which allows them to work full-time, for any employer, anywhere in Canada, for up to three years. Third, once the individual is working under the PGWP, they are eligible to apply for permanent resident status from within Canada after they have one year of full-time work experience in Canada. The finding of the tribunal, based on the evidence of immigration experts who testified before it, was that if all went smoothly, a PGWP-holder would obtain permanent residency status within 6-18 months of applying for it.
[8] The tribunal found that there was no doubt that the appellant would obtain a PGWP shortly after his graduation in January 2015. The tribunal also accepted that the appellant reasonably anticipated obtaining permanent resident status before his PGWP expired. As alluded to above, the appellant followed this path and became a permanent resident in June 2017 (more than one year before the expiration of his PGWP), and a Canadian citizen in March 2022.
[9] I pause to underline the finding of the tribunal with respect to the appellant’s entitlement to a PGWP upon graduation. Based on the record before it, the tribunal found:
• “There was no genuine issue regarding [the appellant’s] eligibility to obtain a post-graduate work permit that would coincide with the job start in 2015 contemplated by both [Imperial] and [the appellant].”
• “Obtaining the PGWP was conditional only on proof that [the appellant] had completed his degree, and he indeed received his SIN for full time post-graduate work within minutes of applying for same in early 2015.”
• “[T]he [appellant] was at all times in status as an international student, with no hindrance to obtaining a PGWP and SIN for commencement of work with [Imperial] in February 2015 or any other later employment start date that could have been negotiated between the parties.”
Thus, the tribunal’s analysis of whether Imperial discriminated against the appellant on the basis of citizenship proceeded from its factual finding that there was no doubt that the appellant would be granted a PGWP shortly after his graduation in January 2015 (he was granted a PGWP in February 2015).
(2) The hiring process [10] In September 2014, during the final semester of his university program, the appellant applied for a full-time job as an entry-level engineer in Sarnia, Ontario, with Imperial. The job posting stated that applicants must be “permanently eligible to work in Canada” and that proof of permanent eligibility to work in Canada “must be in the form of your Canadian birth certificate, Canadian citizenship certificate or Canadian certificate of permanent residence.” This requirement was repeated by Imperial throughout the job competition process.
[11] The appellant, fearful that he would be screened out of the competition, lied and answered “yes” on the application to a question asking whether he was “eligible to work in Canada on a permanent basis”. During the interview process with Imperial, between October and November 2014, the appellant was asked this question several more times, and gave the same untruthful answer. On December 1, 2014, in response to an inquiry from Imperial, the appellant told Imperial that he had received his permanent resident card and his social insurance number the previous year. These statements were untrue.
[12] The appellant was successful in his job application to Imperial. Indeed, he was the top-rated candidate in his group. On December 2, 2014, Imperial wrote to him offering him the position. The letter stated that the offer of employment was conditional on the appellant providing proof that he was “eligible to work in Canada on a permanent basis.” The letter continued that such proof could be in the form of a Canadian birth certificate, a Canadian citizenship certificate, or a Canadian certificate of permanent residence. The conditional offer stated that the appellant was to provide his acceptance by December 11, 2014.
(3) The withdrawal of the offer [13] On December 10, 2014, by two phone calls followed by an email, the appellant advised Imperial that because he was an international student, he would have to work on a PGWP, which would be issued upon his graduation (which was scheduled for January 2015), before he would be permanently allowed to work in Canada. He advised that the PGWP would be valid for three years, and that before it expired, he would obtain permanent residence in Canada. He also attached a link to an immigration website to support this information. He stated that he intended to work and settle in Canada on a permanent basis. He asked if Imperial could make an exception regarding proof of eligibility to work in Canada on a permanent basis.
[14] Imperial responded by letter dated January 8, 2015, and withdrew its job offer. The letter withdrawing the job offer stated as follows:
By letter dated December 2, 2014 Imperial Oil extended a conditional offer of employment to you. That offer was expressly subject to a number of conditions, including your ability to work permanently in Canada. You were required to submit proof of your permanent eligibility in the form of a copy of one of the following: Canadian birth certificate, Canadian citizenship certificate or a Canadian certificate of permanent residence. You have since notified Imperial Oil that you are not eligible to work in Canada on a permanent basis. Because you have not met the conditions of employment as outlined in our offer letter dated December 2, 2014 our offer of employment has now been rescinded.
The letter went on to invite the appellant to re-apply to Imperial if he became eligible to work in Canada on a permanent basis in the future. It further stated that if the appellant reapplied when he was eligible to work permanently in Canada, Imperial “would be pleased to consider [his] application at that time.”
[15] The appellant graduated from McGill in January 2015 and obtained his PGWP in February 2015, as anticipated.
(4) The human rights claim [16] In February 2015, the appellant filed an application with the tribunal alleging discrimination on the basis of citizenship.[2] In particular, the appellant claimed that Imperial had discriminated against him on the basis of citizenship in requiring that he be a Canadian citizen or permanent resident to be hired, despite the fact that by the time the position was anticipated to commence, he would have his PGWP and an unrestricted right to work in Canada for up to three years.
[17] The appellant’s position before the tribunal was that Imperial’s requirement of permanent eligibility to work in Canada disadvantaged only non-citizens (PGWP-holders, who have a lawful right to work full-time in Canada for any employer). PGWP-holders, all of whom are non-Canadian citizens, are disadvantaged by the policy. The fact that permanent residents, a subset of non-Canadian citizens, are not subject to the disadvantage does not cure the discriminatory impact of Imperial’s policy.
[18] Imperial’s position was that its policy did not constitute discrimination based on citizenship because of the exception for permanent residents. Imperial took the position that the distinction its policy drew was based on “immigration status” and not citizenship, because candidates did not need to be Canadian citizens to meet the requirement. Imperial further argued that it withdrew the job offer because of the appellant’s dishonesty and not because he was unable to fulfil its permanent eligibility to work in Canada requirement. Imperial also challenged the appellant’s standing to bring the human rights claim.
(5) The tribunal decision [19] At the request of Imperial, the liability and remedy portions of the hearing were bifurcated. The liability hearing was heard over 13 days spanning a period of eight months. Six witnesses testified – the appellant, three witnesses from Imperial, and two experts on immigration matters. In addition, approximately 430 documents were filed, including affidavits.
[20] The tribunal found in the appellant’s favour in a decision issued July 20, 2018. The tribunal’s findings included: (1) that the appellant had standing under s. 34 of the Code to bring his application; (2) that Imperial discriminated against the appellant on the basis of citizenship by imposing an employment condition of permanent eligibility to work in Canada which must be proved by Canadian citizenship or permanent resident status; (3) that the discrimination was direct discrimination; (4) that Imperial had not established that the appellant’s dishonesty was the sole reason for withdrawing the job offer – even if the appellant’s dishonesty was one factor in Imperial’s withdrawal of the job offer, it was clear that the appellant’s citizenship status was also a factor, and thus the decision was tainted by discrimination on the basis of citizenship; and (5) in the alternative, if the discrimination was not direct discrimination, that Imperial had not established a bona fide occupational requirement (“BFOR”) defence.
[21] Imperial sought reconsideration of the tribunal’s decision. The tribunal denied the reconsideration application in a decision issued February 14, 2019. No issues relating to the reconsideration decision are raised in the appeal by either party.
[22] The tribunal held a further hearing with respect to remedy. In a decision issued August 23, 2019, the tribunal awarded the appellant $120,360.70 in damages for lost income, injury to dignity, feelings and self-respect, and pre-judgment interest. No issues are raised in the appeal relating to the tribunal’s decision on remedy.
(6) The Divisional Court decision [23] Imperial brought an application for judicial review to the Divisional Court. The Divisional Court (Sachs J. dissenting) found that the tribunal’s decision was unreasonable. The majority granted the application for judicial review, quashed the tribunal’s decision, and declined to remit the matter to the tribunal for a new hearing.
[24] Lederer J. and Mew J. gave separate reasons for the majority. Lederer J. characterized the tribunal’s decision as subsuming “permanent resident” status into Canadian “citizenship” and held that the tribunal effectively created a ground of discrimination on the basis of not having Canadian permanent resident status that was not in s. 5 of the Code. In other words, according to Lederer J., the tribunal found that under s. 5 of the Code, the concept of “citizenship” directly protects against discrimination founded on “permanent residence.” In his view, the effect of the tribunal decision was to allow permanent residence to become a separate ground on which discrimination could be alleged – one which was not, in fact, within s. 5 of the Code. Based on this characterization of the tribunal’s reasons, Lederer J. faulted the tribunal’s failure to examine the “plain and ordinary” meaning of “citizenship” and “permanent residence” and found this to be a gap in the tribunal’s analysis. In his view, the tribunal failed to provide a coherent chain of analysis for the conclusion that “permanent residence” is a ground for a claim of discrimination under the ground of “citizenship”.
[25] Mew J. agreed with the result reached by Lederer J. In Mew J.’s view, a requirement that a job applicant be able to work permanently in Canada is not discrimination on the basis of citizenship. He held that it went beyond a reasonable interpretation of the Code to interpret the s. 5 prohibition against discrimination on the basis of citizenship as covering discrimination on the basis of non-Canadian citizenship. Taken to its logical conclusion, any person denied employment because they are not eligible to work in Canada could, in the absence of a BFOR defence, claim discrimination based on citizenship. In this regard, he referred to the example of a hypothetical American, living in Detroit, who is not a permanent resident in Canada (i.e., who has no status in Canada) (a hypothetical posited by Lederer J.).
[26] In addition, Mew J. observed that, if a Canadian employer is to make a substantial investment in training a professional employee, “it is reasonable to require the prospective employee to have a permanent and unrestricted right to accept and maintain employment in Canada.”
[27] Sachs J., in dissent, found that the tribunal’s decision was reasonable, and would have dismissed the application. She began by setting out several basic principles governing interpretation of human rights legislation. In her view, the tribunal’s interpretation of the scope of discrimination on the basis of citizenship was reasonable. In particular, she found reasonable the tribunal’s consideration of the defences to discrimination on the basis of citizenship in s. 16 of the Code as a tool to interpret the scope of citizenship discrimination in s. 5 of the Code. As she summarized this point: “If discriminating on the basis of citizenship or permanent residence status cannot constitute discrimination on the basis of citizenship, why put in the defence?”
[28] Sachs J. further found that the tribunal’s conclusion that Imperial discriminated against the appellant on the basis of citizenship was consistent with the burden in human rights litigation that a claimant need only establish that a decision not to hire is connected to their status as a non-citizen (the protected ground), and not that it was the sole reason they were not hired. She also concluded that the tribunal reasonably addressed the argument that not all non-citizens were affected by Imperial’s policy (because of the exception for permanent residents). Consistent with the decision in Brooks v. Canada Safeway Ltd., [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1219, the tribunal recognized that the fact that not all non-Canadian citizens were disadvantaged by the policy did not detract from the fact that only non-Canadian citizens were disadvantaged, while Canadian citizens were not. Finally, Sachs J. rejected Imperial’s attempt to raise a defence under s. 16(1) of the Code for the first time on judicial review (this issue was not considered by the majority).
[29] I discuss the reasons of both the tribunal and the Divisional Court in more detail in the analysis section of these reasons.
B. Grounds of appeal and additional issues raised by the respondent [30] The appellant raises five grounds of appeal:
1. The majority of the Divisional Court incorrectly applied the reasonableness standard by misinterpreting and mischaracterizing the tribunal’s reasons for finding discrimination on the basis of citizenship, and by substituting its own decision rather than beginning the analysis with respectful attention to the reasons of the tribunal;
2. The majority of the Divisional Court erred in concluding that the tribunal’s finding that the appellant had established prima facie direct discrimination on the basis of citizenship was unreasonable, and in so doing, the majority erred in its approach to the concepts of direct and indirect discrimination;
3. The majority of the Divisional Court incorrectly failed to apply the principle of partial discrimination;
4. The majority of the Divisional Court breached rules of procedural fairness by considering a BFOR defence which had been abandoned by Imperial; and
5. If the decision of the tribunal was unreasonable, the Divisional Court breached rules of procedural fairness and failed to provide adequate reasons for declining to remit the appellant’s claim to the tribunal for a new hearing.
[31] Imperial raises a number of additional issues, seeking to uphold the Divisional Court decision on other grounds. Imperial raises the following additional issues:
1. The tribunal’s decision that the appellant had standing to file an application claiming discrimination in employment on the basis of citizenship was unreasonable;
2. The tribunal’s finding that Imperial withdrew the job offer because the appellant was not a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident, rather than solely because he lied on his application, was unreasonable;
3. The tribunal erroneously shifted the burden to Imperial to prove that it did not discriminate against the appellant, thereby rendering its decision unreasonable; and
4. The tribunal’s decision that the defence under s. 16(1) of the Code was not available to Imperial was unreasonable because no reasons were given for that conclusion.
[32] It is open to a respondent in an appeal to advance arguments to sustain the judgment below which were not raised by the appellant. However, a respondent may not raise entirely new arguments which were not raised below or which would require further evidence which was not led at first instance: R. v. Perka, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 232, at p. 240; Fanshawe College of Applied Arts and Technology v. Au Optronics Corporation, 2016 ONCA 131, 129 O.R. (3d) 391, at para. 9; The Guarantee Company of North America v. Royal Bank of Canada, 2019 ONCA 9, 144 O.R. (3d) 225, at para. 102.
[33] As I explain in the course of the analysis below, three of the additional issues raised by Imperial meet the requirements of Perka for this court to consider them on appeal – the appellant’s standing, whether the appellant’s lies about his status in Canada were the sole basis for the withdrawal of the job offer, and whether the tribunal improperly shifted the burden of proof. However, one issue – the defence under s. 16(1) of the Code – was not raised by Imperial before the tribunal, and I would not allow Imperial to raise it now.
C. SUMMARY OF MY CONCLUSIONS [34] I would allow the appeal and restore the order of the tribunal. I am of the view that the tribunal’s decision is reasonable and that the Divisional Court majority incorrectly applied the reasonableness standard of review in overturning the tribunal’s decision.
[35] In the context of the appellant’s circumstances – that by the anticipated commencement of work he would be permitted to work full-time, anywhere in Canada, for any employer, for a period of three years under the PGWP program – the tribunal’s finding that Imperial’s requirement that only Canadian citizens and permanent residents were eligible for the position was discrimination on the basis of citizenship was reasonable. Imperial’s policy denied eligibility for the position only to non-Canadian citizens. The fact that Imperial excepted one class of non-Canadian citizens (permanent residents) did not insulate its policy from being discrimination on the basis of citizenship. Policies that discriminate on the basis of a prohibited ground are not saved on the basis that they only partially discriminate. As that policy applied to PGWP-holders, who are eligible to work without restriction in Canada for up to three years, it constituted discrimination on the basis of citizenship. The tribunal’s finding that Imperial had not established any defence was also reasonable.
[36] Nor would I uphold the Divisional Court majority’s decision on the basis of any of the additional issues raised by Imperial. The tribunal’s finding that the appellant had standing to bring his claim alleging employment discrimination on the basis of citizenship was reasonable. Regarding the appellant’s dishonesty, the tribunal’s finding of fact that there was insufficient evidence to demonstrate that Imperial withdrew the job offer solely because the appellant was neither a Canadian citizen nor a permanent resident was reasonable. The tribunal did not improperly place a burden on Imperial to prove that it did not discriminate on a prohibited ground. The tribunal’s application of the burden of proof is consistent with jurisprudence on the ultimate burden of proof and evidential burdens in discrimination claims under human rights legislation. Finally, I would not permit Imperial to invoke a defence under s. 16(1) of the Code, as Imperial did not raise that defence before the tribunal.
D. standard of review [37] In an appeal to this court from a decision of the Divisional Court on an application for judicial review, this court must determine whether the Divisional Court identified the appropriate standard of review and applied that standard correctly in reviewing the tribunal’s decision. The latter step requires this court to “step into the shoes” of the Divisional Court and focus on the tribunal’s decision, applying the applicable standard of review. The appeal is, in effect, a de novo review of the tribunal’s decision. This court is not restricted to asking whether the Divisional Court committed a palpable and overriding error in its application of the appropriate standard: Ontario (Health) v. Association of Ontario Midwives, 2022 ONCA 458, 161 O.R. (3d) 561, at para. 42; Turkiewicz (Tomasz Turkiewicz Custom Masonry Homes) v. Bricklayers, Masons Independent Union of Canada, Local 1, 2022 ONCA 780, 476 D.L.R. (4th) 421, at para. 49, leave to appeal to S.C.C. requested, 40564 (January 16, 2023); Agraira v. Canada (Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness), 2013 SCC 36, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 559, at paras. 45-46; Canadian Federation of Students v. Ontario (Colleges and Universities), 2021 ONCA 553, 157 O.R. (3d) 753, at para. 20; Briggs v. Durham (Police Services Board), 2022 ONCA 823, at para. 36, leave to appeal to S.C.C. requested, 40587 (January 27, 2023).
[38] The first step of the analysis is to determine whether the Divisional Court identified the correct standard of review. In this case, both the majority and the dissent in the Divisional Court identified the standard of review as reasonableness.
[39] The appellant and Imperial accept that the applicable standard of review for decisions of the tribunal is reasonableness.
[40] The tribunal participated in this appeal for the purpose of addressing the appropriate standard of review from the tribunal’s decisions. In its factum, the tribunal argued that the appropriate standard of review is “patent unreasonableness” because this is the standard of review set out at s. 45.8 of the Code, and because, in Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Vavilov, 2019 SCC 65, [2019] 4 S.C.R. 653, at para. 34, the Supreme Court instructed that courts should “to the extent possible, respect clear statutory language that prescribes the applicable standard of review.”
[41] After the tribunal’s factum was filed, in Midwives, this court considered and rejected the same argument put forward by the tribunal that the patent unreasonableness standard should apply. The court held in Midwives, at paras. 44-83, that the standard of review applicable to reviews of the tribunal’s decisions is reasonableness, consistent with this court’s previous decision in Shaw v. Phipps, 2012 ONCA 155, 347 D.L.R. (4th) 616.
[42] In light of the decision in Midwives, the tribunal did not pursue oral submissions on the standard of review. Although the tribunal did not abandon its position that the appropriate standard of review is patent unreasonableness, it accepted that the court should follow the holding in Midwives. In light of the recent considered analysis of this issue in Midwives, I agree that the appropriate standard of review of the tribunal’s decision is reasonableness.
[43] Reasonableness review finds its starting point in judicial restraint and respect for the distinct role of administrative decision-makers. A reviewing court must pay “respectful attention” to the reasons offered for an administrative decision. This means focusing on the decision actually made by the administrative decision-maker and starting the analysis by developing an understanding of the decision-maker’s reasoning process in order to determine whether the decision as a whole is reasonable. A reasonable decision is one that is “based on an internally coherent and rational chain of analysis and that is justified in relation to the facts and law that constrain the decision maker”. In applying the reasonableness standard, the focus is “on the decision actually made by the decision maker, including both the decision maker’s reasoning and the outcome.” In addition, the reviewing court is not to hold the reasons up to a standard of perfection or conduct a “line-by-line treasure hunt for error”: Vavilov, at paras. 75, 82-86, and 99-135; Turkiewicz, at paras. 55-60; Midwives, at para. 82.
[44] Because the standard of review requires this court to step into the shoes of the Divisional Court and conduct a de novo review, these reasons focus on the tribunal’s decision. However, in the course of my analysis, I highlight areas where the Divisional Court majority erred in its application of the reasonableness standard.
[45] Although the majority and dissenting decisions of the Divisional Court correctly identified the standard of review as reasonableness, in my view, the majority erred in its application of the reasonableness standard in three ways.
[46] First, the majority failed to give “respectful attention” to the reasons of the tribunal. Although the majority said it was applying a reasonableness standard, the substance of the analysis by both judges in the majority approached the review by asking how they themselves would have decided the issues and restarted the analysis from scratch.
[47] Second, the majority mischaracterized the tribunal’s reasoning, contrary to the direction in Vavilov to begin the reasonableness analysis by developing an understanding of the administrative decision-maker’s reasoning that led to the decision. Starting with a mischaracterization of an administrative decision-maker’s reasoning undermines both deference and the possibility of reviewing the decision on a reasonableness standard.
[48] Third, the majority’s analysis ignored well-established law on the approach to be followed in analyzing a claim of discrimination under human rights legislation. As a result, the majority erred by failing to apply the reasonableness standard conscious of the law that constrained both the tribunal and the Divisional Court.
E. Relevant principles of analysis of discrimination claims under human rights legislation [49] Before turning to the reasonableness of the tribunal’s decision, I begin with a discussion of a number of basic principles for the analysis of human rights claims that are well-established in the jurisprudence. This context is relevant to understanding the law that constrained the tribunal as a decision-maker, and also relevant to where the Divisional Court majority misapplied the reasonableness standard.
(1) Elements of a claim of discrimination under human rights legislation [50] The three-step analysis to establish a prima facie claim of discrimination is well-established. The applicant must show: (1) that they have a characteristic protected from discrimination under the Code (i.e., they are a member of a group protected by the Code); (2) that they have experienced an adverse impact (treatment) in a category of activity regulated by the Code, such as employment or a service; and (3) that the protected characteristic was a factor in the alleged adverse treatment: Moore v. British Columbia (Education), 2012 SCC 61, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 360, at para. 33; Midwives, at para. 101; Peel Law Association v. Pieters, 2013 ONCA 396, 116 O.R. (3d) 81, at paras. 55-59.
[51] Under the third branch of the analysis for a prima facie case of discrimination, the applicant need only prove a connection between the prohibited ground and the adverse treatment. The connection does not need to be causal. Further, the connection between the adverse treatment and the prohibited ground can co-exist with other non-discriminatory factors. The prohibited ground need not be the only reason for the adverse treatment, or even the predominant reason: Québec (Commission des droits de la personne et des droits de la jeunesse) v. Bombardier Inc. (Bombardier Aerospace Training Centre), 2015 SCC 39, [2015] 2 S.C.R. 789, at paras. 43-52; Midwives, at para. 102; Pieters, at paras. 59-60.
(2) The burden of proof and the shifting evidential burdens [52] The ultimate burden to prove a claim of discrimination on a prohibited ground is on the applicant. However, the case law establishes a series of shifting evidential burdens to structure the analysis. The law is well-settled and was recently considered by this court in Midwives, at paras. 143-51.
[53] An applicant who brings a claim under the Code bears the ultimate burden to prove that a discriminatory ground under the Code was a factor in the impugned conduct. If the applicant establishes a prima facie case of discrimination, then the evidential burden shifts to the responding party to rebut the prima facie case by providing a credible, non-discriminatory explanation for the impugned conduct which rebuts the prima facie case. In other words, once a prima facie case of discrimination on a prohibited ground is demonstrated, the evidential burden shifts to the respondent to rebut that a prohibited ground of discrimination was a factor in the impugned conduct. If the responding party succeeds in rebutting the prima facie case, then the evidential burden shifts back to the applicant to prove that the respondent’s non-discriminatory explanation is pretextual. See also: Pieters, at paras. 63-74; Ontario v. Association of Midwives, 2020 ONSC 2839, 82 Admin L.R. (6th) 241, at paras. 144-51, aff’d 2022 ONCA 458, 161 O.R. (3d) 561.
[54] The ultimate burden of persuasion always rests with the party claiming discrimination. However, the shifting evidential burdens support the underlying principle of anti-discrimination legislation that where a responding party seeks to demonstrate a non-discriminatory reason for the impugned action, it is not sufficient to show that a non-discriminatory reason was part of the reason for the action if discriminatory reasons were also part of the reason. Rather, the responding party must show that the non-discriminatory reason was the sole reason for the action. In other words, the jurisprudence recognizes that the reasons that motivate actions taken by, for example, an employer or potential employer, may be multi-factorial. If one of the reasons is discriminatory, this establishes a violation of the Code (subject to statutory defences): Bombardier, at paras. 43-52. The presence of a non-discriminatory reason for the impugned conduct does not insulate the conduct from a finding of discrimination under the Code if it is combined with one or more discriminatory reasons.
[55] The shifting evidential burdens also recognize that if there is a non-discriminatory explanation for the impugned conduct, the respondent is uniquely positioned to provide evidence on that issue, because it has to do with the respondent’s state of mind or motivation: Pieters, at paras. 70-73.
(3) Direct versus adverse impact discrimination [56] In British Columbia (Public Service Employee Relations Commission) v. BCGSEU, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 3 (“Meiorin”), the Supreme Court adopted a revised unified approach to employer defences under human rights legislation, no longer based on categorizing discrimination as direct or adverse impact (sometimes referred to as indirect). The court gave several reasons for this, including that the distinction is sometimes artificial, difficult to apply, and manipulable; that it is difficult to justify different remedies depending on which category is applied to a discrimination claim; that it can tend to legitimate systemic discrimination; and that it is inconsistent with the purposes of human rights legislation: at paras. 25-53.
[57] However, the distinction between direct and adverse impact discrimination continues to have relevance in Ontario because the BFOR defence in s. 11 of the Code is only available where discrimination is indirect:[3] Entrop v. Imperial Oil Limited (2000), 50 O.R. (3d) 18 (C.A.), at paras. 67-69.
[58] Although the Supreme Court in Meiorin signalled a move away from categorizing discrimination as direct or adverse impact, the concepts of direct and adverse impact discrimination have relevance to this appeal because one of the issues on which the majority of the Divisional Court found the tribunal decision to be unreasonable was the finding that Imperial’s policy constituted direct discrimination.
[59] The distinction between direct and adverse impact discrimination has its origin in Canadian law in Ont. Human Rights Comm. v. Simpsons-Sears, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 536 (“O’Malley”). In O’Malley, McIntyre J., writing for the court, described the distinction as follows, at p. 551:
A distinction must be made between what I would describe as direct discrimination and the concept already referred to as adverse effect discrimination in connection with employment. Direct discrimination occurs in this connection where an employer adopts a practice or rule which on its face discriminates on a prohibited ground. For example, “No Catholics or no women or no blacks employed here.” There is, of course, no disagreement in the case at bar that direct discrimination of that nature would contravene the Act. On the other hand, there is the concept of adverse effect discrimination. It arises where an employer for genuine business reasons adopts a rule or standard which is on its face neutral, and which will apply equally to all employees, but which has a discriminatory effect upon a prohibited ground on one employee or group of employees in that it imposes, because of some special characteristic of the employee or group, obligations, penalties, or restrictive conditions not imposed on other members of the work force. For essentially the same reasons that led to the conclusion that an intent to discriminate was not required as an element of discrimination contravening the Code, I am of the opinion that this Court may consider adverse effect discrimination as described in these reasons a contradiction of the terms of the Code. An employment rule honestly made for sound economic or business reasons, equally applicable to all to whom it is intended to apply, may yet be discriminatory if it affects a person or group of persons differently from others to whom it may apply. [Emphasis added.]
[60] Thus, direct discrimination exists where a rule or policy discriminates against a protected group on its face. Adverse impact discrimination exists where a rule or policy is neutral on its face, but adversely affects members of a protected group (i.e., on the basis of a prohibited ground, such as race, sex, or creed).
[61] As is clear from the passage from O’Malley, the concern which motivated recognition of adverse impact discrimination is that a neutrally expressed rule or policy may affect particular groups protected from discrimination under human rights legislation in a discriminatory way. The fact the discrimination is not expressly intended by a neutral rule or policy does not make its effects any less real for the affected group: see also Meiorin, at para. 25; Entrop, at para. 71.
[62] More recent articulations of the distinction between direct and indirect discrimination have maintained the approach from O’Malley that discrimination is characterized as direct where a rule or policy is discriminatory on its face, and adverse impact where a rule or policy is neutral on its face but discriminatory in its effects on a particular group based on a prohibited ground: Entrop, at para. 65; Fraser v. Canada (Attorney General), 2020 SCC 28, 450 D.L.R. (4th) 1, at paras. 30-39; British Columbia (Superintendent of Motor Vehicles) v. British Columbia (Council of Human Rights), [1999] 3 S.C.R. 868, at para. 15 (“Grismer”); Stewart v. Elk Valley Coal Corp., 2017 SCC 30, [2017] 1 S.C.R. 591, at para. 24.
[63] The Supreme Court in Meiorin and this court in Entrop recognized that in some cases, characterizing the alleged discrimination as direct or adverse impact may be difficult: Meiorin, at para. 27; Entrop, at para. 70.
[64] In light of the direction in Meiorin signalling a move away from undue focus on whether discrimination was direct or adverse impact, but mindful of the language of s. 11(1) of the Code which makes a BFOR defence unavailable for cases of direct discrimination, this court held in Entrop, at para. 80, that the s. 11 defence should be unavailable only in cases which can be “neatly characterized” as direct discrimination. In other words, if there is doubt about whether discrimination should be characterized as direct or adverse impact in a particular case, it should be characterized as adverse impact, to allow a BFOR defence under s. 11 to be considered.
[65] I flag now an issue I return to below. The Supreme Court has held that the test to establish prima facie discrimination is the same whether the claim is of direct or adverse impact discrimination: Grismer, at paras. 18-19; Fraser, at para. 49.
[66] As a result, whether a discrimination claim is characterized as direct or adverse impact has one practical effect in Ontario – whether a BFOR defence under s. 11 is available. Where a BFOR defence is not in issue, the question of whether a claim of discrimination is properly characterized as direct or adverse impact has no practical effect.
(4) Partial discrimination is still discrimination [67] In order to establish a finding of prima facie discrimination, it is not necessary that all members of the protected group at issue be affected or affected in the same way. For example, in Brooks, the Supreme Court held that an employer’s policy that denied benefits to employees during pregnancy constituted discrimination on the basis of sex. Although not all women become pregnant, the policy had a discriminatory impact on women. In other words, the fact that discrimination is partial does not convert it into non-discrimination: Brooks, at pp. 1247-48. See also: Janzen v. Platy Enterprises Ltd., [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1252, at pp. 1288-89; Fraser, at paras. 72-75; Meiorin, at paras. 11 and 69.[4]
[68] The interveners, the South Asian Legal Clinic of Ontario and the Colour of Poverty/Colour of Change Network, directed the court to another helpful example of this principle. At one time, elementary school teaching contracts often either barred married women from contracts, or required that they be placed on limited-term contracts. These policies were based on sexist stereotypes of conflict between child-rearing and work for mothers, and gendered division of labour in families. Despite the fact that these policies did not affect women who chose not to marry – and thus did not affect all women – such policies were found to constitute discrimination on the basis of sex.[5] The policies only applied to women. The fact that not all women were affected did not “cure” the discriminatory effect. It simply made the policies partially, rather than fully, discriminatory.
[69] In light of this review of the human rights law principles and constraints governing the analysis of the tribunal (and the Divisional Court), I turn now to a consideration of whether the tribunal’s decision was reasonable.
F. Was the tribunal’s liability decision reasonable? [70] As outlined above, the standard of review in this case requires this court to step into the shoes of the Divisional Court and assess the reasonableness of the tribunal’s decision. For this reason, rather than structure the analysis as a point-by-point assessment of the appellant’s grounds of appeal and then the respondent’s additional issues, I structure the analysis around whether the tribunal’s decision was reasonable and focus on the areas where the reasonableness of the decision is challenged. The ultimate question this court must answer is whether the decision of the tribunal “is based on an internally coherent and rational chain of analysis and … is justified in relation to the facts and the law that constrain the decision maker:” Vavilov, at paras. 85 and 99.
[71] I structure my analysis of the reasonableness of the tribunal’s decision around the following issues:
1. Was the tribunal’s decision that the appellant had standing to file an application claiming discrimination in employment on the basis of citizenship reasonable?
2. Was the tribunal’s finding of a prima facie claim of employment discrimination on the basis of citizenship reasonable?
3. Was the tribunal’s finding that Imperial withdrew the job offer because the appellant was not a Canadian citizen or permanent resident, rather than solely because of his dishonesty in the job competition, reasonable?
4. Was the tribunal’s decision that the defence under s. 16(1) of the Code was not available to Imperial reasonable?
(1) Was the tribunal’s decision that the appellant had standing to file an application claiming discrimination in employment on the basis of citizenship reasonable? [72] Imperial argues that the tribunal’s finding that the appellant had standing to bring his claim alleging discrimination in employment on the basis of citizenship was unreasonable. The substance of Imperial’s submission is that the appellant did not have standing to bring the claim because, at the time he applied for the position and until the date Imperial withdrew the job offer (as distinct from the time he would have been anticipated to commence work), he did not have status in Canada that permitted him to work without restriction, since up to that time, he was a foreign national and did not yet have the PGWP.
(a) Is Imperial entitled to raise the standing issue? [73] There is a preliminary issue of whether Imperial may raise the appellant’s standing on appeal, as there is dispute about whether it was raised in the Divisional Court.
[74] Neither the majority nor the dissent in the Divisional Court addressed the merits of Imperial’s position that the appellant lacked standing to bring his application under the Code. However, Imperial’s Notice of Application and factum in the Divisional Court raised the standing issue as a ground of review. In light of the lack of clarity on what position Imperial took in oral submissions in that court, I address the issue on the merits.
[75] As I explain below, in my view, the tribunal’s conclusion that the appellant had standing to bring the claim that Imperial discriminated against him on the basis of citizenship is reasonable. I would not interfere with it.
(b) The tribunal’s reasons on the appellant’s standing to bring the claim [76] The tribunal found that the appellant had standing to bring his claim under the Code because he had a “direct interest” in the pre-employment condition imposed by Imperial that he was unable to meet.
[77] Imperial had argued before the tribunal that the appellant did not have standing to bring his application because from the date that he made his job application to Imperial (September 10, 2014) to the date of the withdrawal of the job offer (January 8, 2015), he was an international student on a student visa, and as a result was not permitted to work off-campus on a full-time basis. In other words, Imperial argued that although the appellant’s status as a PGWP-holder upon graduation (which the tribunal found was imminent) would entitle him to work full-time, anywhere in Canada, for any employer, for up to three years, because he had not yet graduated when the job offer was withdrawn, he did not have standing to bring the application.
[78] The tribunal rejected this argument. The tribunal’s conclusion on standing is founded on both the wording of s. 34(1) of the Code, which defines the right to bring an application under the Code, and the evidence in the record, which supported the finding that the appellant had a direct interest in the application.
[79] The tribunal noted the breadth of the right of standing codified in s. 34(1) of the Code. Section 34(1) of the Code provides: “If a person believes that any of his or her rights under Part I have been infringed, the person may apply to the Tribunal for an order under section 45.2” (either within one year after the incident if it is a single incident, or within one year after the last incident, if it is a series of incidents).
[80] The substance of the tribunal’s holding on standing was as follows:
The HRTO has repeatedly ruled that to have standing to bring an application under section 34(1) of the Code, an applicant need only allege that her or his Code rights have been infringed. It is clear on the face of the Application that the applicant has alleged that his right to be free from discrimination with respect to employment was engaged in his interactions with IO. The applicant is not a “public interest” applicant but is indeed a person whose interest was directly at stake and who alleged that he experienced discrimination on the basis of citizenship. [Emphasis in original.]
[81] The tribunal referred to prior authority of the tribunal in support of assessing the appellant’s standing based on whether he had a direct interest at stake in the subject matter of the proceeding: Carasco v. University of Windsor, 2012 HRTO 195. The tribunal also noted that it is settled law in Ontario that job applicants enjoy the protection of the Code before they are formally employed because the wording in s. 5(1) “with respect to employment” has been interpreted to include pre-employment scenarios – that is, it covers discrimination in the job search process.
[82] The tribunal then made findings based on the record before it in support of its conclusion that the appellant had a direct interest in the application. Central to these findings was evidence that under the PGWP program, the appellant would be entitled, upon graduation (which was imminent – scheduled for January 2015), to obtain a PGWP without delay. The evidence before the tribunal was that the only condition on the appellant obtaining the PGWP was confirmation from the university that he had completed his university program. The PGWP was “open” and permitted him to work full-time, anywhere in Canada, for any employer, but was limited to three years. In other words, upon graduation, the appellant’s right to work in Canada was unrestricted, but was time-limited to three years.
[83] At the time the appellant applied for the job with Imperial, he anticipated completing his engineering studies in December 2014 and formally graduating in January 2015. Imperial’s job posting indicated the start date for the position was May 2015, after the appellant’s anticipated graduation. In the job offer letter of December 2, 2014, the start date listed was February 2, 2015, but the letter indicated that that date was “negotiable”. There was no evidence led before the tribunal that the appellant would be expected to commence work in the position with Imperial before his graduation. Indeed, the evidence from Imperial’s witnesses was that new graduate hires would start employment after their graduation. Thus, the evidence established that the appellant would be eligible to work without restriction for three years, by the time he would have been expected to start work for Imperial in the position. The evidence before the tribunal was that the appellant received his PGWP in February 2015, as anticipated at the time he applied for work with Imperial.
[84] The tribunal further accepted the uncontroverted evidence that the appellant was a student engineer who, in applying for the position at Imperial, was genuinely seeking his first job that would commence after his graduation. The tribunal concluded that “[a]s a genuine job seeker, for work to commence at some yet to [be] determined date after his graduation, it is abundantly clear to the Tribunal that the [appellant] had a direct stake in [Imperial’s] hiring process, starting with [Imperial’s] screening of recruits on the McGill campus and thus he has standing to challenge [Imperial’s] employment practices under the Code.”
(c) Positions of the parties on standing [85] Imperial argues that the tribunal’s finding that the appellant had standing to bring his application under the Code was unreasonable. Imperial’s argument is the same as that raised before the tribunal – that up until the date of Imperial’s letter withdrawing the job offer (January 8, 2015), the appellant was not yet eligible to work without restriction in Canada. As such, according to Imperial, he did not have standing to bring an application under s. 34(1) of the Code based on discrimination in employment because he did not have an unrestricted legal right to work in Canada at the time he applied for the job and up to the time the job offer was withdrawn. Until his graduation, the appellant’s right to work in Canada was limited to part-time work on the university campus or full-time work only in the regular breaks between academic terms. Imperial’s position is that in order for a person to have standing to bring a claim based on discrimination in employment on the basis of citizenship, a person must be eligible to work in Canada, and that the relevant time to assess an applicant’s right to work is when they apply or when the job offer is made, not the anticipated date of commencement of work. Imperial argues that the tribunal’s standing analysis does not reveal a rational chain of analysis.
[86] The appellant argues that the tribunal’s decision that he had standing based on having a direct interest in the issues raised in the application was reasonable. The tribunal’s reasons demonstrate that it applied the relevant legal principles grounded in the text of s. 34(1) of the Code and the concept of having a “direct interest” to ground standing, and its analysis and application of those principles on the factual record before it were reasonable.
(d) The tribunal’s decision on the appellant’s standing was reasonable [87] I agree with the appellant that the tribunal’s analysis and conclusion regarding his standing were reasonable. The principles relied on by the tribunal to assess the appellant’s standing are consistent with the broad language of s. 34(1) of the Code, with prior jurisprudence of the tribunal on standing, and with the approach to direct interest standing (private standing) in the courts. The factual conclusions reached by the tribunal are well-grounded in the evidentiary record and are reasonable.
[88] As the tribunal noted, s. 34(1) of the Code provides for a broad grant of standing. Any person who “believes that any of his or her rights under Part I have been infringed” has standing to apply to the tribunal for a remedy. One could imagine scenarios where there is no factual basis for a person’s belief that their rights have been infringed, and on that basis the assertion of standing would be speculative. But that is not the case here.
[89] As noted above, the tribunal referred to its prior decision in Carasco regarding the principles governing standing under the Code. Carasco considered the three types of standing available under the Code. I will only address the type of standing under s. 34(1), as that is what is at issue in this case. Carasco held, in accordance with the wording of s. 34(1), that standing to bring an application under the Code is available to a person who believes that any of their rights under Part I have been infringed. Carasco notes that s. 45.2, which is referred to in s. 34(1), makes the tribunal’s authority (following a hearing) to award a remedy conditional on the tribunal finding an infringement of the rights of the party bringing the application. Thus, in order for an applicant to have standing to bring an application under s. 34(1), the application must assert a breach of the applicant’s rights under the Code, and seek a remedy for the breach of the rights. The analysis in Carasco focused on the importance of the claim being for the breach of the applicant’s own rights, as opposed to a claim in the nature of public interest standing (which under s. 35(1) of the Code, may only be brought by the Ontario Human Rights Commission).
[90] The “direct interest” analysis applied by the tribunal in this case is consistent with the approach in Carasco. The tribunal considered whether the applicant had a viable claim that his rights under the Code had been infringed by Imperial and sought a remedy for the alleged breach.
[91] The analysis of standing under the Code need not be identical to the approach taken by the courts in civil matters, particularly given the broad grant of standing in s. 34(1) of the Code. That said, the tribunal’s approach to standing in this case is consistent with established principles regarding direct interest standing in the courts.
[92] The test applied by the courts for private interest standing requires that the applicant or plaintiff have a personal and direct interest in the issue raised in the proceeding. The interest must not be too indirect, remote, or speculative. Various formulations of this requirement are used in the jurisprudence, including that the person is “specifically affected by the issue”, has a “personal legal interest”, or has a “personal and direct interest” in the outcome of the proceeding. This type of standing is often referred to as “direct interest” or “private” standing to distinguish it from public interest standing (the latter having different requirements): Canada (Minister of Finance) v. Finlay, [1986] 2 S.C.R. 607, at pp. 617-18; Bedford v. Canada, 2010 ONSC 4264, 102 O.R. (3d) 321, at paras. 44-47, aff’d on this point, 2012 ONCA 186, 109 O.R. (3d) 1, at para. 50, rev’d in part on other grounds, 2013 SCC 72, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 1101; Carroll v. Toronto-Dominion Bank, 2021 ONCA 38, 153 O.R. (3d) 385, at para. 33; Thomas A. Cromwell, Locus Standi: A Commentary on the Law of Standing in Canada (Toronto: Carswell, 1986), at p. 5.
[93] The ultimate concern behind rules for private standing (as distinct from public interest standing) is that the party bringing the proceeding have a real legal interest in the proceeding that they are seeking to vindicate, rather than just a “sense of grievance”: Carroll, at para. 33; Landau v. Ontario (Attorney General), 2013 ONSC 6152, at paras. 16 and 21; Cromwell, at pp. 9-10.
[94] The tribunal reasonably found that the appellant had a real legal interest in the claim he made. The tribunal applied the direct interest test reasonably to the record before it. The tribunal considered the legal and factual issues raised by the application, asked whether the appellant had a direct interest in them, and found that he did. The evidence before the tribunal supported its findings that the appellant was a genuine job seeker; that upon graduation he would be entitled to a PGWP which would entitle him to work full-time, anywhere in Canada, for any employer, for up to three years; that he was anticipated to graduate in January 2015 (and in the event did); and that the expectation of both the appellant and Imperial was that he would commence work after he graduated (i.e., once he was permitted to work without restriction under the PGWP program). These findings support the conclusion that the appellant had a direct interest in the hiring policy of Imperial limiting prospective employees to Canadian citizens and permanent residents. The tribunal’s conclusion that the appellant had satisfied the requirements for standing under s. 34(1) of the Code is reasonable.
[95] Imperial largely focuses its argument on the timing of the alleged discrimination in relation to the appellant’s eligibility to work in Canada, arguing that because he did not have a legal right to work in Canada at the time the alleged employment discrimination occurred, he did not have standing to bring this claim. Lying behind Imperial’s submissions on this issue is the asserted concern (as set out in Imperial’s factum) that, if the appellant had standing to bring his claim, “then any person in the world would have standing to file a claim of discrimination in employment contrary to Section 5(1) of the Code.”
[96] Respectfully, this argument is based on a false premise that is not supported by the record or the tribunal’s reasoning. The tribunal found that the appellant had standing to bring the claim because on the record before it, the appellant was entitled to the PGWP once he graduated, conditional only on providing proof from the university of the completion of his degree. The appellant had already finished the coursework for his degree when the job offer was rescinded, and was just waiting on the formal graduation. Thus, the appellant’s claim that he would have the status to work in Canada without restriction imminently was well-grounded in the record. The tribunal found that there was no doubt that he would obtain his PGWP following his graduation in January 2015. The appellant’s claim based on an anticipated right to work without restriction in the immediate future was not a speculative claim.
[97] By contrast, a hypothetical human rights claim filed by “any person in the world” (as posited in Imperial’s factum), without any claim to a status in Canada that would give them an unrestricted right to work, would fail the test for standing because the assertion of any right to work in Canada would be speculative.
[98] The tribunal’s finding that the appellant had standing to bring the claim of discrimination on the basis of citizenship was reasonable.
(2) Was the tribunal’s finding of a prima facie claim of employment discrimination on the basis of citizenship reasonable? [99] The Divisional Court majority held that the tribunal’s finding that Imperial engaged in employment discrimination on the basis of citizenship was unreasonable. The appellant challenges this holding. Whether the tribunal’s finding that Imperial discriminated against the appellant on the basis of citizenship was reasonable is at the heart of this appeal.
[100] The appellant argues that the tribunal’s decision was reasonable. The appellant argues that the tribunal reasonably interpreted the meaning of discrimination in employment on the basis of citizenship in s. 5 of the Code in the context of the legislation as a whole – and in particular s. 16 of the Code – and in accordance with the principle to interpret human rights legislation in a liberal manner, consistent with its purposes. The appellant argues that the tribunal did not conceive of “permanent resident status” as a distinct ground of discrimination under the Code. Rather, the tribunal found that the ability to live and work in Canada on a permanent basis is closely associated with Canadian citizenship, and that under Imperial’s policy, non-Canadian citizens who were eligible to work in Canada were excluded from consideration (although not all non-Canadian citizens were excluded because of the exception for individuals with permanent resident status). The tribunal found that based on these factors, the exclusion of PGWP-holders from consideration for employment constituted discrimination on the basis of citizenship. The fact that Imperial’s policy did not discriminate against all non-Canadian citizens, because of the exception for individuals with permanent resident status, did not cure the discrimination. Further the appellant argues that the tribunal reasonably characterized the discrimination as direct because it is apparent on the face of Imperial’s policy and the job posting.
[101] Imperial argues that its policy does not discriminate on the basis of citizenship, but rather on the basis of immigration status, which is not a prohibited ground under the Code. Imperial points to the fact that its policy provided that individuals with permanent resident status were eligible for employment as establishing that the policy did not discriminate on the basis of citizenship. Imperial argues that the tribunal’s reasons do not provide a coherent chain of reasoning. Imperial argues that the tribunal’s reasoning unreasonably extended the prohibited ground of citizenship in s. 5 of the Code to include status as a permanent resident of Canada as an additional ground of prohibited discrimination.
[102] I begin the analysis with a summary of the tribunal’s reasons on this issue.
(a) The tribunal’s reasons for finding a prima facie claim of employment discrimination on the basis of citizenship [103] The tribunal began its analysis of whether Imperial engaged in discrimination on the prohibited ground of citizenship with the applicable legal framework. This included:
• Section 5 of the Code, which provides that every person has the right to be free from discrimination with respect to employment on a number of grounds, including citizenship.
• Section 9 of the Code, which states, among other things, that no one shall “infringe or do, directly or indirectly, anything that infringes a right under this Part” (which includes a right under s. 5).
• Section 11 of the Code, which sets out the BFOR defence.
• The onus of proof in human rights claims. (I discuss the tribunal’s consideration of the onus in more detail below, as it is a separate issue raised by Imperial).
[104] The tribunal then accurately summarized the positions of the parties.
[105] The tribunal pointed out that the issue raised in this case was somewhat novel to the tribunal, as earlier cases involving allegations of discrimination on the basis of citizenship were ultimately decided “without resort to a detailed analysis of this ground in the Code and its relationship to various subgroups of non-citizens.” In this section of the analysis, the tribunal explained why particular prior tribunal decisions could not be said to have decided the issue raised in this case.
[106] As part of its interpretation of the meaning of discrimination on the basis of “citizenship” in s. 5 of the Code, the tribunal considered another section of the Code that uses the word “citizenship”, s. 16, to ensure that a consistent meaning is attached to the term within the Code. The tribunal noted that s. 16(1) creates a defence to discrimination on the basis of citizenship by providing that a right to non-discrimination based on citizenship is not infringed “where Canadian citizenship is a requirement, qualification or consideration imposed or authorized by law.” Section 16(2) provides that a right to non-discrimination based on citizenship is not infringed “where Canadian citizenship or lawful admission to Canada for permanent residence is a requirement, qualification or consideration adopted for the purpose of fostering and developing participation in cultural, educational, trade union or athletic activities by Canadian citizens or persons lawfully admitted to Canada for permanent residence.” Section 16(3) provides that the right to non-discrimination based on citizenship is not infringed “where Canadian citizenship or domicile in Canada with the intention to obtain Canadian citizenship is a requirement, qualification or consideration adopted by an organization or enterprise for the holder of chief or senior executive positions.”
[107] Based on considering the meaning of citizenship in s. 5 of the Code in the context of its use in s. 16 of the Code, the tribunal found as follows:
In the Tribunal’s view, the very fact that the Legislature saw fit to deem that in certain situations, hiring preference for “Canadian citizens” and “permanent residents” is not discrimination, means that conversely, in the absence of the s. 16 defence, HRTO can find that preferential hire on the basis of Canadian citizenship and permanent residence status amounts to discrimination under the Code. The language chosen by the Legislature in formulating a defence in s. 16 clearly contemplated that “permanent residence” (or “domicile in Canada with intention to obtain citizenship”) as well as “Canadian citizenship” are requirements that in certain context[s] may properly found a claim of discrimination on the ground of citizenship.
A plain reading of the text above indicates that the Legislature, in drafting the s. 16 Code defence(s) expressly associated “domicile in Canada”, “permanent residence” with the concept of “Canadian citizenship”. In the Tribunal’s view, this association supports the view that “permanent residence”, although not expressly a listed “ground”, is properly associated with the ground of “citizenship” (or lack thereof) under the Code. [Emphasis in original.]
[108] The tribunal found that citizenship (of Canada) and non-citizenship were “clear demarcations captured by the Code” and that non-citizenship captures all individuals in Ontario who are not Canadian citizens. The tribunal recognized that among non-citizens, there are individuals “with varying residence status and different degrees of entitlement to work in Canada.” The tribunal found that for the appellant to obtain protection from discrimination under the Code on the basis of citizenship, he need only establish that the alleged discriminatory treatment was linked to his personal characteristic of being a non-citizen of Canada (or a non-Canadian citizen).
[109] The tribunal relied on the principle that discrimination only affecting some members of a protected group does not render the treatment non-discriminatory, referring to the Supreme Court decision in Meiorin. That is, partial discrimination against some members of a protected group is still prohibited discrimination. Thus, the fact that Imperial’s policy only discriminated against some non-Canadian citizens (because it excepted permanent residents) did not render its policy non-discriminatory. On this issue of whether Imperial’s policy discriminated on the basis of citizenship, the tribunal concluded:
The case law is clear that the applicant need only demonstrate that he belongs to a class of non-Canadian citizens; he need not demonstrate that all members of that class are disadvantaged by IO’s requirement. [Citation omitted.]
The Tribunal finds that IO’s “permanence requirement”[6] imposed a disadvantage on the applicant and is linked to “Canadian citizenship” and “permanent residence”, terminology contemplated by the Legislature and used together when drafting a defence to “Canadian citizenship” being a non-discriminatory requirement under s.16 of the Code. The fact that IO’s requirement distinguished on the basis of “Canadian citizenship” and “permanent residence” does not morph the distinction to one based on “immigration status”. As in Washington [v. Student Federation of the University of Ottawa, 2010 HRTO 1976] above, it is sufficient that “Canadian citizenship” is engaged by IO’s requirement for it to run afoul of the Code on the ground of citizenship. [Emphasis in original.]
For greater clarity, the fact that permanent residents, a category of non-Canadian citizens, are advantaged relative to the applicant is immaterial to the finding that IO’s requirement imposed a disadvantage on the applicant and is discriminatory on the ground of “citizenship”.
[110] The tribunal then turned to the three-part analysis for discrimination in hiring, which requires an applicant to show: (1) that they were qualified for the job; (2) that they did not get the job because of a prohibited ground; and (3) that the person who got the job was no more qualified but lacked the attribute on which the applicant based their human rights complaint.
[111] The tribunal noted that Imperial did not dispute that it treated the appellant differently based on its policy that a condition of employment was being eligible to work in Canada on a permanent basis. Thus, the tribunal found that a prima facie case was made out that required an answer from Imperial.
[112] The tribunal noted that Imperial did not dispute that its policy was designed to exclude job candidates who did not have eligibility to work permanently in Canada. However, Imperial took the position that its policy was not discrimination on a prohibited ground (i.e., that it was discrimination on the basis of immigration status and not citizenship), and also asserted a BFOR defence on the basis that permanence of employees was an operational requirement (I address the BFOR defence further below).
[113] The tribunal rejected Imperial’s submission that the policy was not discrimination on the basis of citizenship because it permitted the hiring of permanent residents, and thus the distinction was on the basis of “immigration status” and not citizenship.
[114] The tribunal further held that Imperial’s policy constituted direct discrimination. It explained that it reached this conclusion because the policy, on its face, distinguished between candidates based on whether they could work permanently in Canada, and barred any person who was not “eligible to work permanently in Canada”, with such eligibility to be proven by proof of Canadian citizenship or Canadian permanent resident status. The tribunal held that this was direct discrimination on the basis of citizenship because only non-Canadian citizens are disadvantaged by the policy. As applied to the appellant’s situation, all PGWP-holders (all of whom are non-Canadian citizens) are discriminated against, despite their right to work in Canada for three years. The tribunal noted that no statistical analysis or examination of disparate impact was required to determine the impact of Imperial’s policy. The discriminatory effect on non-Canadian citizens was express on the face of Imperial’s policy. The fact that the discrimination was partial because permanent residents were excepted did not change that characterization. On this basis the tribunal found that the appellant had established a prima facie case of discrimination on the basis of citizenship.
[115] I break my analysis of the reasonableness of the tribunal’s conclusion with respect to discrimination on the basis of citizenship into four parts:
• the reasonableness of the tribunal’s interpretation of the scope of discrimination on the basis of citizenship under s. 5 of the Code;
• the reasonableness of the tribunal’s finding that Imperial discriminated against the appellant on the basis of citizenship, including its findings in relation to the principle of partial discrimination;
• the reasonableness of the tribunal’s analysis in light of this court’s decision in Irshad (Litigation Guardian of) v. Ontario (Minister of Health) (2001), 55 O.R. (3d) 43 (C.A.); and
• the reasonableness of the tribunal’s characterization of the discrimination as direct, rather than indirect.
(b) The tribunal’s interpretation of the scope of discrimination on the basis of citizenship in s. 5 of the Code in the context of PGWP-holders is reasonable [116] In my view, the tribunal’s analysis of the scope of discrimination on the basis of citizenship in s. 5 of the Code is reasonable. The tribunal’s reasons provide a rational chain of analysis that is justified in relation to the record before it and the relevant law. In particular, the tribunal’s interpretation of s. 5 of the Code is reasonable in light of the principles of statutory interpretation.
[117] Vavilov is clear that decisions of administrative bodies involving the interpretation of statutes are subject to review on a standard of reasonableness, unless they raise (inter alia) “general questions of law of central importance to the legal system as a whole”: Vavilov, at paras. 4, 53, 58-62, 69. No party to this appeal contends that the issues raised fall within the exception for general questions of law of central importance to the legal system as a whole.
[118] In light of the standard of review, I am cautious about elaborating on the interpretation of s. 5 of the Code beyond the reasons given by the tribunal. However, as the issue of the interpretation of discrimination in employment on the basis of citizenship comes before this court for the first time in this appeal, in my view, it is helpful for clarity of the analysis to address the issue in more detail. I do so, recognizing that it is not the role of this court to conduct a de novo interpretation of s. 5, but rather to engage with the tribunal’s reasoning and determine whether the tribunal’s interpretation is “defensible in light of the interpretive constraints imposed by law”: Canada Post Corp. v. Canadian Union of Postal Workers, 2019 SCC 67, [2019] 4 S.C.R. 900, at para. 41.
(i) Principles of statutory interpretation and interpretation of human rights legislation
[119] The modern approach to statutory interpretation is set out in Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes Ltd. (Re), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 27, at p. 41, quoting Professor Elmer Driedger:
Today there is only one principle or approach, namely, the words of an Act are to be read in their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the object of the Act, and the intention of Parliament.
In the administrative law context, a decision-maker must interpret legislative provisions “consistent with the text, context and purpose, applying its particular insight into the statutory scheme at issue”: Vavilov, at paras. 120-21.
[120] When the legislation to be interpreted is human rights legislation, a further principle applies. Human rights legislation is to be given a broad, liberal, and purposive interpretation, consistent with its remedial objectives: Canadian National Railway Co. v. Canada (Canadian Human Rights Commission), [1987] 1 S.C.R. 1114, at p. 1134; Robichaud v. Canada (Treasury Board), [1987] 2 S.C.R. 84, at pp. 89-90; and Brooks, at pp. 1244-45.
[121] Both of these principles must be borne in mind when considering the meaning of discrimination on the basis of citizenship in s. 5 of the Code.
(ii) Text and history of ss. 5 and 16 of the Code
[122] Although not the focus of the tribunal’s analysis, the legislative history of s. 5 and other provisions of the Code provides useful context for assessing the reasonableness of the tribunal’s decision. The original version of the Code, passed in 1962, did not include citizenship as a protected ground. Section 4 of the original version prohibited discrimination in employment on the basis of “race, creed, colour, nationality, ancestry or place of origin.”
[123] Citizenship as a protected ground in relation to employment discrimination was added to the Code in amendments passed in 1981.[7] At the same time, the defences in what is now s. 16 were enacted: Human Rights Code, 1981, S.O. 1981, c. 53, ss. 4 and 15.
[124] Neither party provided the tribunal, the Divisional Court, or this court with references to the legislative debates in relation to the amendments leading to the addition of citizenship as a prohibited ground of discrimination. This may be because there is little in the legislative debates that assists with the interpretation of what are now ss. 5 and 16. Given the significant changes that the 1981 amendments made to the Code, and the expansion of prohibited grounds of discrimination, the debates largely focused on other topics, including whether to add sexual orientation as a prohibited ground: see e.g., Ontario, Legislative Assembly, Hansard, 31st Parl., 4th Sess. (9 December 1980); Ontario, Legislative Assembly, Hansard, 32nd Parl., 1st Sess. (15 May 1981).
[125] The text of both ss. 5 and 16 of the present Code is the starting point for the interpretation of the meaning of “equal treatment with respect to employment without discrimination because of … citizenship”. The tribunal set out the text of s. 5, which enacts the right to equal treatment in employment and provides as follows:
5 (1) Every person has a right to equal treatment with respect to employment without discrimination because of race, ancestry, place of origin, colour, ethnic origin, citizenship, creed, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, record of offences, marital status, family status or disability. [Emphasis added.]
[126] The tribunal recognized that s. 16 creates statutory defences to claims of discrimination on the basis of citizenship in some circumstances where Canadian citizenship is a requirement, qualification, or consideration. It provides as follows:
16 (1) A right under Part I to non-discrimination because of citizenship is not infringed where Canadian citizenship is a requirement, qualification or consideration imposed or authorized by law.
(2) A right under Part I to non-discrimination because of citizenship is not infringed where Canadian citizenship or lawful admission to Canada for permanent residence is a requirement, qualification or consideration adopted for the purpose of fostering and developing participation in cultural, educational, trade union or athletic activities by Canadian citizens or persons lawfully admitted to Canada for permanent residence.
(3) A right under Part I to non-discrimination because of citizenship is not infringed where Canadian citizenship or domicile in Canada with the intention to obtain Canadian citizenship is a requirement, qualification or consideration adopted by an organization or enterprise for the holder of chief or senior executive positions. [Emphasis added.]
(iii) Grammatical and ordinary meaning of s. 5 of the Code
[127] The tribunal noted that “citizenship” is not defined in the Code. While the tribunal did not explicitly discuss the term’s ordinary meaning, it is clear the tribunal understood “citizenship” to refer to being a citizen of a country – that is, the formal status of citizenship. Section 5 does not limit itself to citizenship of any particular country. Thus, on a plain reading, s. 5 appears to prohibit[8] (subject to applicable defences) discrimination based on whether someone is or is not a Canadian citizen and also discrimination based on whether someone is or is not a citizen of another country (for example, discrimination based on whether someone is or is not a citizen of France).
[128] However, Rizzo is clear that the ordinary meaning is not the end of the analysis. In this case, consistent with Rizzo, the tribunal reasonably considered how a related provision of the Code, s. 16, impacts the interpretation of discrimination on the basis of citizenship in s. 5.
(iv) Reading s. 5 in the context of s. 16 of the Code
[129] The crux of the Divisional Court majority’s concern with the tribunal’s analysis was the majority’s view that interpreting s. 5 to cover employment discrimination based on citizenship or a factor associated with citizenship (ability to work in Canada permanently) would overshoot the purpose of s. 5, because in general, as a matter of federal immigration law, non-Canadian citizens are either not permitted to or have very limited ability to work in Canada. In my view, reading s. 5 in the context of s. 16 of the Code, as the tribunal did, supports the tribunal’s analysis of the broader scope of s. 5.
[130] I pause to refer back to the established structure of analysis for human rights claims, which I have set out above, which involves assessing if a prima facie claim of discrimination has been established, and if so, considering whether any defences raised are applicable. This structure of analysis effectively separates the consideration of whether there has been discrimination on the basis of citizenship under s. 5 of the Code from the consideration of whether a defence has been made out under any of the subsections of s. 16.
[131] However, for purposes of statutory interpretation of the meaning of discrimination on the basis of “citizenship” in s. 5 of the Code, s. 5 must be read in the context of the Code as a whole, including s. 16: Rizzo, at para. 21; Ruth Sullivan, The Construction of Statutes, 7th ed. (Toronto: LexisNexis Canada, 2022) at § 13.02[3]. As the Supreme Court explained in Heritage Capital Corp. v. Equitable Trust Co., 2016 SCC 19, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 306, at para. 28, provisions of a statute are presumptively intended to work together as a whole:
There is a presumption of statutory interpretation that the provisions of a statute are meant to work together “as parts of a functioning whole” and form an internally consistent framework. In other words, “the whole gives meaning to its parts”, and “each legal provision should be considered in relation to other provisions, as parts of a whole”. [Citations omitted.]
[132] Based on these principles of statutory interpretation, it was reasonable for the tribunal to consider the scope of the defences available in s. 16 of the Code as providing interpretive guidance on the scope of “citizenship” as a prohibited ground of discrimination in s. 5.
[133] Section 16 of the Code enacts defences which are specific to discrimination on the basis of citizenship. Both ss. 16(1) and 16(3) create defences to allegations of discrimination on the basis of citizenship that are applicable to the employment context.[9]
[134] The full scope of application of the s. 16(1) defence is beyond the scope of this appeal (as I discuss further below). But what is clear is that it creates a defence to allegations of discrimination on the basis of citizenship (in employment and in any other areas where discrimination on the basis of citizenship is prohibited) where “Canadian citizenship is a requirement, qualification or consideration imposed or authorized by law.”
[135] Consistent with the tribunal’s reasoning, the fact that the legislature created this defence and the terms in which it is expressed, show that the legislature understood that the concept of discrimination on the basis of citizenship in s. 5 of the Code applied to a requirement of Canadian citizenship. There would be no need to create a defence where a requirement of Canadian citizenship is imposed by law if requiring Canadian citizenship did not infringe s. 5 (in the absence of the statutory defence).
[136] Section 16(3) provides further support for interpreting s. 5 such that the exclusion of non-Canadian citizens or a subset of non-Canadian citizens constitutes discrimination on the basis of citizenship. There are two aspects of s. 16(3) that support this conclusion. First, the existence of a specific defence in s. 16(3) applicable to circumstances where a requirement of employment for “chief or senior executive positions” is “Canadian citizenship or domicile in Canada with the intention to obtain Canadian citizenship” supports the conclusion that the legislature was of the view that absent the enactment of s. 16(3), this type of requirement would infringe the right to be free of discrimination on the basis of citizenship protected by s. 5. The legislature would not have provided for the defence in s. 16(3) if the conduct was not otherwise in breach of s. 5, as it would be unnecessary.
[137] Second, the defence in s. 16(3) is limited to “holder[s] of chief or senior executive positions.” The limiting of the defence to a class of high-level managerial employees supports that the legislature did not intend for there to be a defence created by s. 16(3) to apply to other types of employees.
[138] The tribunal reasonably relied on reading s. 5 in the context of s. 16 – considering it in the context of the statute as a whole – in interpreting the meaning of discrimination in employment on the basis of citizenship.
[139] The tribunal reasonably found that reading s. 5 and s. 16(1) together demonstrates a legislative intent to recognize limits placed on employment of non-Canadian citizens as a matter of federal immigration law, but to prohibit employers from placing additional barriers on non-citizens beyond the limits imposed by their status in Canada under federal immigration law (unless such limits can be brought within the defences in ss. 16(2) or (3)).
(v) Relevance of federal immigration law and the PGWP program
[140] Another consideration supports the tribunal’s interpretation of discrimination in employment on the basis of citizenship in the context of PGWP-holders, although it is a consideration that was not directly addressed by the tribunal.
[141] In the usual course, provincial legislation is interpreted without regard to federal law. However, in the statutory context of ss. 5 and 16 of the Code, and in particular s. 16(1), the provincial statute clearly invokes considerations of federal immigration law.
[142] The s. 16(1) defence refers to a “requirement, qualification or consideration imposed or authorized by law.” This language could apply to either provincial or federal law. That said, because immigration and citizenship law is a matter of federal jurisdiction, with extensive federal legislation and regulation, the provincial legislature must have been aware that federal law is the most likely source of a requirement, qualification or consideration relating to Canadian citizenship “imposed or authorized by law.”
[143] In this particular context, the harmony between the tribunal’s interpretation of the scope of discrimination on the basis of citizenship and federal immigration law and policy supports the reasonableness of its interpretation. The tribunal and courts should strive to adopt interpretations of provincial laws that achieve harmony with, rather than frustrate, federal legislation: see e.g., Fawcett v. Fawcett, 2018 ONCA 150, at para. 35; Maurice v. Priel, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1023, at pp. 1030-33.
[144] In general, by virtue of ss. 2(1) and 30(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c. 27 (“IRPA”), a “foreign national”, defined as a person who is not a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident, may not work in Canada. However, s. 30(1) of IRPA also includes an exception to the prohibition against foreign nationals working in Canada, where they are “authorized to do so under [IRPA].”
[145] The clear legislative intent of the combined effect of ss. 5 and 16(1) of the Code is to prohibit discrimination on the basis of citizenship, including non-Canadian citizenship, but to create a defence so that a requirement, qualification, or condition of Canadian citizenship does not infringe the Code if it is imposed or authorized by law, including federal immigration law.
[146] The evidence and findings of the tribunal regarding the federal PGWP program are clear that the purpose of the PGWP program is to create a pathway to Canadian citizenship for international students who come to Canada to study and who intend to settle in Canada, in order to give Canada the benefit of these skilled workers. The program’s design involves allowing individuals with a PGWP to work in Canada, obtain Canadian workplace experience, and establish roots in Canada. Indeed, workplace experience is a requirement to proceed through the program on the path to permanent residency and Canadian citizenship, because individuals on a PGWP must have one year of full-time employment in Canada on the PGWP before they can apply for permanent residency.
[147] In this context, interpreting s. 5 of the Code as prohibiting discrimination in employment against PGWP-holders on the basis that they are not eligible to work in Canada permanently is not contrary to federal immigration law. Indeed, the opposite is true. The federal PGWP program is undermined when job postings are restricted to Canadian citizens and permanent residents, excluding PGWP-holders such as the appellant. Such restrictions bar PGWP-holders from consideration for entry-level jobs which are a necessary step to successful labour market integration, and a condition precedent to their applying for permanent resident status. The tribunal’s interpretation is consistent with federal immigration law and policy.[10]
[148] Considering all of these factors together, I conclude that the tribunal’s interpretation of the scope of discrimination in employment on the basis of citizenship as it relates to PGWP-holders is reasonable.
(c) The tribunal’s conclusion that Imperial’s policy discriminated against PGWP-holders on the basis of citizenship is reasonable [149] The tribunal concluded that Imperial’s policy discriminated against the appellant on the basis of citizenship (and, similarly, against all PGWP-holders on the basis of citizenship) because the policy excluded from hiring a group of non-Canadian citizens (and only non-Canadian citizens) who were eligible to work full-time, for any employer, anywhere in Canada. Even though not all non-Canadian citizens were excluded from hiring (because of the exception for permanent residents), the excluded group was composed solely of non-Canadian citizens who had a right to work in Canada (PGWP-holders).
[150] In my view, this conclusion is reasonable and is consistent with the law regarding proof of a claim of employment discrimination.
[151] As I have outlined above in the section of these reasons addressing principles of interpretation and application of human rights legislation, in order to establish a claim of discrimination, a claimant is required to show, inter alia, a “connection” between the prohibited ground and the adverse treatment they experienced. A claimant is not required to show that the prohibited ground was the only reason for the treatment, or even the predominant reason.
[152] In this case, the tribunal reasonably found that the appellant was a member of a group defined by a protected ground under the Code, citizenship, because he was a non-Canadian citizen. The tribunal reasonably found that the appellant experienced adverse treatment because the job offer was withdrawn. The tribunal reasonably found that the appellant’s non-citizenship was a factor in the adverse treatment. The appellant was a non-Canadian citizen, who had a right to work full-time, for any employer, anywhere in Canada, for up to three years. Imperial withdrew the job offer because his right to work in Canada was not permanent – a factor that the tribunal reasonably found is closely connected to Canadian citizenship.
[153] An argument made by Imperial, and also relied on by the majority of the Divisional Court, is that Imperial’s policy is not discriminatory because Imperial did not limit its hiring only to Canadian citizens, as it would also hire individuals with permanent resident status. The tribunal rejected this contention, and in my view, did so reasonably.
[154] The fact that the policy does not exclude all non-Canadian citizens does not “cure” its discriminatory effect. Rather, it results in partial discrimination (against a subset of non-Canadian citizens eligible to work in Canada), rather than full discrimination (against all non-Canadian citizens eligible to work in Canada). It is well-established in Canada that partial discrimination is still discrimination. I have set out the law on this basic principle of human rights law above.
[155] Imperial’s job posting and policy distinguished between two classes of non-Canadian citizens in circumstances where both classes are eligible to work full-time for any employer, anywhere in Canada – permanent residents (who were eligible for the position under Imperial’s policy), and PGWP-holders (who were not eligible under Imperial’s policy). Imperial argues, and the Divisional Court majority found, that this was discrimination on the basis of immigration status or permanent resident status, which are not prohibited grounds under the Code. While the conclusion that permanent resident status and immigration status are not prohibited grounds of discrimination under the Code is correct as far as it goes, it fails to acknowledge that Imperial’s policy is also partial discrimination on the basis of citizenship.
[156] Imperial’s policy denies one group of non-Canadian citizens, who are legally entitled to work full-time, for any employer, anywhere in Canada (PGWP-holders), eligibility for the position. The group excluded from the position by Imperial’s policy is exclusively non-Canadian citizens. Based on the principles in Brooks and other cases, the fact that Imperial’s policy does not discriminate against all non-Canadian citizens (because permanent residents are excepted) does not render it non-discriminatory.
[157] Further, the fact that Imperial’s policy can also be described as discrimination on the basis of immigration status or lack of permanent resident status (which are not protected grounds) does not change the fact that it is also partial discrimination on the basis of citizenship. In this regard, it is like the cases involving discrimination against married women teachers referred to above. At the time those cases were decided, “marital status” was not a prohibited ground of discrimination under the Nova Scotia Human Rights Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 214. Thus, although the policy discriminated on the basis of marital status, that in itself did not contravene the legislation. However, notwithstanding the fact that one could describe the policy as discrimination on the basis of marital status (not a prohibited ground), and notwithstanding that it did not apply to all women, since unmarried women were excepted, the policy was still found to constitute discrimination on the basis of sex.
[158] In sum, the tribunal’s decision that Imperial’s policy discriminated on the basis of citizenship demonstrates an internally coherent chain of analysis that is justified in relation to the facts and law. The decision is reasonable and the reviewing court was not justified in intervening.
(d) The tribunal’s analysis of discrimination on the basis of citizenship was reasonable in light of this court’s decision in Irshad [159] The appellant argues that the Divisional Court majority erred in holding that one of the reasons the tribunal’s decision was unreasonable is because it did not specifically reference or deal with this court’s decision in Irshad. I agree.
[160] In Irshad, this court considered an argument made under s. 15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms involving an allegation of discrimination on the basis of citizenship. Imperial argued before the tribunal that the conclusions in Irshad about citizenship discrimination under s. 15 of the Charter should bear on the interpretation of discrimination on the basis of citizenship under the Code. The tribunal did not specifically reference Irshad in its reasons and the Divisional Court concluded this omission rendered its decision unreasonable.
[161] The appellant argues before us that the tribunal’s decision is not unreasonable for not mentioning Irshad by name because the decision addresses the substance of Imperial’s argument and because, in any event, Irshad is distinguishable from the case at hand. Imperial responds that the issues raised in Irshad were analogous to the issues in this case, and as a result, the tribunal ought to have treated Irshad as persuasive legal precedent.
[162] I would reject Imperial’s submission that the tribunal decision is unreasonable in light of Irshad for two reasons.
[163] First, although the tribunal did not mention Irshad by name, the tribunal addressed in substance the issue that Imperial had argued based on Irshad – that the interpretation of the scope of discrimination on the basis of citizenship under s. 5 of the Code should be governed by a case which considered an allegation of discrimination on the basis of citizenship under the Charter.
[164] The tribunal recognized that interpreting the meaning of citizenship discrimination under the Code was an issue of statutory interpretation. As a result, the meaning of discrimination on the basis of citizenship in s. 5 of the Code had to be considered within the context of the entire statute, and in particular related provisions of the Code. The tribunal found that the defences in s. 16 of the Code cast light on the meaning of discrimination on the basis of citizenship in s. 5 of the Code, which distinguished it from the interpretation of discrimination on the basis of citizenship under the Charter, because the Charter has no analogous defence to s. 16 of the Code. The tribunal concluded on this issue as follows:
As cases decided under that Charter invariably engage government actors as respondents, those cases do not provide much guidance in deciding Applications under the Code regarding “citizenship” given that the Code provides a defence under s.16(1) that where “Canadian citizenship is a requirement, qualification or consideration imposed or authorized by law”, a right is not infringed. This defence effectively screens government (and others) who elect to use citizenship as a requirement and who can demonstrate that the requirement is imposed or authorized by law. In the instant Application, this defence is not available to [Imperial].
[165] The tribunal was not required to explicitly reference Irshad for its decision to be reasonable. Vavilov is clear that an administrative body is not required in its reasons to address every argument made by a party: at para. 91. In any event, the issue Imperial raised in relation to the Irshad decision was addressed, even though the case was not referred to by name. The tribunal dealt with the substance of Imperial’s argument that discrimination on the basis of citizenship under s. 5 of the Code should be interpreted the same way as discrimination on the basis of citizenship under the Charter, and rejected it. This does not render the tribunal’s decision unreasonable, per Vavilov.
[166] Second, the tribunal’s conclusion that the analysis of discrimination on the basis of citizenship under the Code was distinguishable in this case from the interpretation of discrimination on the basis of citizenship under the Charter was reasonable. In other words, the legal and factual circumstances in Irshad are distinguishable from the legal and factual circumstances in this case.
[167] It was reasonable for the tribunal to conclude that the presence of s. 16 as interpretive context for discrimination on the basis of citizenship in s. 5 of the Code distinguished the issue before it from the issue of discrimination on the basis of citizenship under s. 15 of the Charter. The Charter has no analogue to s. 16 of the Code. In the absence of reasons to interpret guarantees in human rights legislation differently from Charter guarantees, anti-discrimination provisions in human rights legislation and the Charter right to equality are often interpreted similarly where they address the same subject matter: see e.g., Fraser, at paras. 37-49. But where, as here, the statutory scheme provides a basis to support a different interpretation of human rights legislation, that context must inform the interpretation of human rights legislation because it speaks to a different intention.
[168] Further, the factual circumstances of Irshad are distinguishable from this case. Irshad involved a s. 15 Charter challenge to legislation and regulations that limited the right to insured health services in Ontario. The purpose of the legislation and regulations at issue was to limit healthcare expenditures by defining the residency requirement to be insured more precisely, and in particular, to eliminate insurance coverage for individuals who were temporarily resident in Ontario.
[169] The legislation and regulations limited eligibility to insured health services based on two factors. First, a person had to be “ordinarily resident” in Ontario, as that term was defined in the regulation. Second, individuals who were “ordinarily resident” in Ontario had to bring themselves within one of 11 categories set out in the regulation. Many, but not all, of the categories were based on immigration status.
[170] In Irshad, the individuals challenging the legislation and regulations were ordinarily resident in Ontario, but could not bring themselves within one of the 11 categories. They argued that the legislation and regulation drew a distinction between “new immigrants” who were ordinarily resident in Ontario and other persons ordinarily resident in Ontario. In addition, they challenged the three-month waiting period for coverage, which applied regardless of citizenship or immigration status (although with some exceptions). For example, it applied to Canadian citizens who moved to Ontario from another province.
[171] This court found that the legislation did not infringe the s. 15 right to equality. The court held that the impugned legislation and regulations did not draw a distinction based on whether individuals were or were not new immigrants. Many new immigrants would be within the 11 categories and eligible for health insurance (such as landed immigrants, some applicants for landed immigrant status, refugees, and some applicants for refugee status). Further, some people not eligible for health insurance were neither new to Ontario nor new immigrants. This court also rejected the argument that the legislation and regulations drew a distinction on the basis of citizenship. The court found that under the scheme many non-citizens were eligible for health insurance, and that Canadian citizenship was “but one of many criteria” that would make a person eligible for health insurance if they were ordinarily resident of Ontario. Further, the court held that the three-month waiting period was not discriminatory, as it applied to all new residents of Ontario, regardless of their citizenship, former place of residence, or immigration status.
[172] In short, in Irshad, this court found that the distinctions drawn in the legislation and regulations at issue were not based on citizenship or being a new immigrant. Rather, they were based on a requirement that individuals have an intention to make Ontario their permanent home, and the legal status to “legitimately hold that intention”: at para. 133. In my view, the factual and legal distinctions between Irshad and the case at hand mean that Irshad does not govern the result in this appeal, and that the tribunal sufficiently addressed the substance of Imperial’s argument based on Irshad.
(e) The tribunal’s finding that the discrimination was direct rather than indirect was reasonable [173] In my view, the tribunal’s finding that Imperial’s discrimination against the appellant was direct is reasonable. However, if there is any doubt about whether the discrimination ought to have been characterized as adverse impact, in the circumstances of this case it would have no impact on the result.
[174] As I have explained above, given the jurisprudence and legislation concerning the availability of a BFOR defence under s. 11 of the Code, the only relevance to whether the discrimination in this case is characterized as direct or adverse impact is the availability of the BFOR defence. The tribunal found that the discrimination was direct, but went on, in the alternative, to consider whether Imperial had established a BFOR defence (in the event that the discrimination was better characterized as adverse impact). The tribunal found on the record before it that Imperial failed to establish a BFOR defence. Imperial did not seek review of that finding in the Divisional Court or raise it in this court. Thus, whether the discrimination was reasonably characterized as direct or indirect had no impact on the outcome. I will address each of these points in turn.
[175] As I have summarized above, direct discrimination occurs where an employer adopts a practice or policy which on its face discriminates on a prohibited ground. Adverse impact discrimination occurs where an employer’s practice or policy is neutral on its face, but has a discriminatory effect on a prohibited ground on an employee or a group of employees by imposing obligations or restrictions on them not imposed on other employees.
[176] The tribunal found that Imperial’s discrimination against the appellant (and all PGWP-holders) was direct. The tribunal reached this conclusion because it found that, on its face, Imperial’s policy discriminated against a subset of non-Canadian citizens. The tribunal found that this was so because the policy was clear that the only people eligible for employment were Canadian citizens and permanent residents. On its face, the policy excluded all non-Canadian citizens apart from permanent residents. It excluded a subset of non-Canadian citizens, and only non-Canadian citizens.
[177] In my view, particularly given the standard of review and the difficulty recognized in the jurisprudence of characterizing whether discrimination is direct or adverse impact, I find that the tribunal’s conclusion that the discrimination was direct is reasonable.
[178] Reading the job posting and Imperial’s policy, as well as its communications with the appellant, the effect is: We will hire Canadian citizens and also will hire a subset of non-Canadian citizens (i.e., permanent residents). On its face, Imperial’s policy is clear that a subset of non-Canadian citizens eligible to work in Canada is excluded from hiring, and it is only non-Canadian citizens who are excluded.
[179] Having said this, I accept that on this particular issue, reasonable people could differ on whether to characterize the discrimination as direct or indirect.[11] It may be that one could conceptualize the discrimination as being adverse impact if the requirement imposed by Imperial’s policy were characterized as “permanent eligibility to work in Canada.” Given the policy’s express reference to Canadian citizenship, I am not persuaded that this would be the best characterization of the policy. For this reason, I do not view this case as a situation where this court’s decision in Entrop would suggest characterizing the discrimination as adverse impact in order to leave open a BFOR defence. However, if the distinction made by the policy were characterized as being on the basis of “permanent eligibility to work in Canada”, the policy would be neutral on its face, but have an adverse impact on non-Canadian citizens. All Canadian citizens are eligible to work under the policy. But only a subset of non-Canadian citizens are eligible – permanent residents. This policy has an adverse impact on PGWP-holders, like the appellant, and the adverse impact is connected to their non-Canadian citizenship. Only non-Canadian citizens are impacted by the policy (although not all non-Canadian citizens are impacted because of the exception for individuals with permanent resident status).
[180] As I have adverted to above, and discuss further below, many non-Canadian citizens do not have the broad right to work that PGWP-holders have. As a practical matter, the claims of many non-Canadian citizens would founder on the s. 16(1) defence. But PGWP-holders, like the appellant, are legally eligible to work full-time, for any employer, anywhere in Canada. They are legally eligible to hold the job the appellant applied for. But Imperial’s policy, even if characterized as a requirement of eligibility to work permanently in Canada, has an adverse effect on PGWP-holders that is connected to their non-Canadian citizenship.
[181] In light of this possibility to characterize the discrimination as adverse impact rather than direct, if I had concluded that the tribunal’s finding that discrimination in this case was direct rather than indirect was unreasonable, is there any possibility that the outcome of this case would have been different? In my view, there is not. In the circumstances of this appeal, whether the discrimination is characterized as direct or adverse impact has no impact on the outcome.
[182] As I have outlined above, the only practical effect in this case of whether the discrimination is characterized as direct or adverse impact is that, in Ontario, a BFOR defence under s. 11 of the Code is only available as a defence to a finding of adverse impact discrimination, and not available as a defence to direct discrimination.
[183] Although the tribunal concluded that the discrimination was direct, and thus a BFOR defence was not available pursuant to s. 11 of the Code, the tribunal went on to consider the BFOR defence on the merits, in the alternative.
[184] The tribunal found that Imperial had not established a BFOR defence on the merits. I do not summarize the reasons why the tribunal came to this conclusion because Imperial did not contest that finding in its application for judicial review to the Divisional Court. Nor does it contest that finding in its response to the appeal in this court.
[185] As Imperial did not contest the reasonableness of the tribunal’s alternative finding that a BFOR defence was not established, even if the tribunal’s conclusion that the discrimination was direct rather than adverse impact were found to be unreasonable, the characterization of the discrimination as direct had no impact on the outcome of the proceedings before the tribunal.
(f) The Divisional Court majority did not correctly apply the standard of review [186] As the standard of review directs this court to step into the shoes of the Divisional Court on an appeal from an application for judicial review, I need not examine in detail the errors made by the Divisional Court majority. But I will flag them briefly.
[187] First, the majority reasons did not take as a starting point respectful attention to the reasons of the tribunal. Rather, the majority started by assessing the question of whether Imperial discriminated against the appellant by re-doing its own analysis from scratch. This is evident from, for example, the hypothetical fact situations involving non-citizens without any legal right to work in Canada that appear to have driven the majority’s analysis. These hypothetical situations do not arise from the tribunal’s analysis, which was focused squarely on the record before it.
[188] Second, the majority mischaracterized the reasons of the tribunal. Respectful attention to a tribunal’s reasons, which is the starting point of reasonableness review, cannot be accorded if the reviewing court mischaracterizes the tribunal’s reasons. The reasons of Lederer J. characterize the tribunal as having effectively created a new ground of discrimination not found in the Code based on permanent resident status. As I have outlined above, that was not the basis on which the tribunal found that Imperial had discriminated against the appellant. Nor did the tribunal fail to examine the “plain and ordinary” meaning of “citizenship” and “permanent residence”. The tribunal’s reasons show that it understood the difference between these statuses as a matter of federal immigration law. The tribunal’s finding of discrimination on the basis of citizenship was not based on subsuming the concept of “permanent residence” into citizenship.
[189] Third, the majority of the Divisional Court failed to follow well-established analytical principles for human rights claims. I will highlight two examples of this.
[190] The first is in the reasons of Lederer J. His reasons fail to consider the principle from Brooks and subsequent decisions that partial discrimination on a prohibited ground is still discrimination. Indeed, his reasons proceed on a basis that is contrary to this well-established principle. In substance, he found that Imperial did not discriminate on the basis of citizenship because it permitted hiring of one sub-group of non-citizens – permanent residents of Canada.
[191] The second failure to follow well-established principles of analysis for human rights claims is the focus in the reasons of Mew J. on the hardship for employers if Imperial’s policy constitutes discrimination on the basis of citizenship. This approach failed to follow the established structure to analysis of human rights claims. Potential hardship to an employer is not considered when assessing whether a prima facie claim of discrimination on a prohibited ground has been established. Rather, it is a matter to be considered after a prima facie case of discrimination has been established, as part of a BFOR defence and consideration of an employer’s duty to accommodate to the point of undue hardship: see e.g., Stewart, at paras. 22-23; Pieters, at paras. 64-66.
[192] I note as well two other problems with the focus on employer hardship in the reasons of Mew J. First, as I have noted, Imperial did not pursue the BFOR defence in the Divisional Court. With the issue not having been raised by Imperial, it was unfair to resurrect it as a ground to overturn the tribunal decision.
[193] Second, the record did not support the conclusion that Imperial would suffer undue hardship if it was required to change its policy and consider PGWP-holders for employment. Indeed, the tribunal made specific findings of fact to the contrary. The tribunal considered whether there would be hardship to Imperial if it were required to consider PGWP-holders for employment in its consideration of whether Imperial had established a BFOR defence. Imperial had asserted that being required to hire PGWP-holders would pose a risk to succession planning and to Imperial losing its investment in training of new hires. The tribunal found that this assertion was not borne out on the evidence led by Imperial.
[194] In particular, the tribunal found that, to the extent Imperial had in some cases waived its policy for more senior positions and hired PGWP-holders, there was “no empirical data” to demonstrate that these PGWP-holders left employment with Imperial at higher rates than Canadian citizens or permanent residents within the two to three years it generally took to obtain permanent resident status, or that those who left within that timeframe did so because of a failure to obtain permanent resident status.
[195] Because Imperial did not challenge the reasonableness of the tribunal’s alternate finding that a BFOR defence was not established, it is not necessary for this court to consider whether the tribunal’s conclusion in that regard was reasonable. However, I flag these issues in relation to the record because they demonstrate that Mew J. did not start his analysis from a posture of respectful attention to the reasons of the tribunal. Rather, he raised concerns about hardship to employers which, as related to the employer before the tribunal, Imperial, the tribunal had found were not supported in the record before it.
[196] What appears to have driven the reasoning of the majority in the Divisional Court was a floodgates concern that if Imperial’s treatment of the appellant constituted discrimination on the basis of citizenship, then, in the view of the majority, any non-Canadian citizen anywhere in the world could claim discrimination in employment on the basis of citizenship if they were not considered for a job in Canada. Both judges in the majority referred to the situation of a hypothetical American who lives in Detroit (just over the Canadian border). The majority was of the view that the tribunal’s analysis of the appellant’s claim would have the result that this hypothetical American, with no status in Canada at all, and no legal right to work in Canada, could allege discrimination on the basis of citizenship if they were refused employment by Imperial.
[197] The analogy posited by the majority of the Divisional Court is flawed. It fails to recognize the fundamental distinction between PGWP-holders and other non-Canadian citizens – PGWP-holders have a legal right under federal immigration law to work full-time, for any employer, anywhere in Canada. This distinguishes PGWP-holders from other non-Canadian citizens in terms of their right to work in Canada. The tribunal was clear in its reasons that the central fact that drove its analysis was that when the appellant received his PGWP on graduation (of which there was no doubt based on the tribunal’s findings), he would have the right to work full-time, anywhere in Canada, for any employer. The tribunal’s reasoning would not extend to a person without an unrestricted right to work in Canada.
[198] This is particularly so given s. 16(1) clarifies that the right to non-discrimination based on citizenship is not infringed “where Canadian citizenship is a requirement, qualification or consideration imposed or authorized by law.” Because federal immigration law does not give most non-citizens a right to work in Canada, the hypothetical American living in Detroit without any status in Canada would not have a viable citizenship discrimination claim, as they would not be authorized by law to work in Canada. Accordingly, the concern of the majority in the Divisional Court that the tribunal’s analysis would allow any non-Canadian citizen to allege discrimination in employment is unfounded.
[199] In sum, the tribunal’s finding that Imperial discriminated against the appellant on the basis of citizenship was reasonable. The majority of the Divisional Court applied the standard of review incorrectly. When the standard of review is correctly applied, there is no basis for the reviewing court to intervene.
(3) Was the tribunal’s finding that Imperial withdrew the job offer because the appellant was not a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident, rather than solely because of his dishonesty in the job competition, reasonable? [200] Imperial argues that the tribunal’s finding that Imperial withdrew the job offer from the appellant at least in part because he was not a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident, rather than solely because of his dishonesty in the job competition, was unreasonable. Imperial submits that the appellant’s dishonesty was a reasonable non-discriminatory explanation for withdrawing the job offer that had nothing to do with the fact that he was not a Canadian citizen or permanent resident. Imperial asserts that there was “uncontradicted” evidence from John Blysniuk, a manager at Imperial, that the reason that Imperial withdrew the job offer was because of the appellant’s dishonesty in the job competition about his status in Canada, not because he was not a Canadian citizen or permanent resident.
[201] The appellant argues that the tribunal’s factual finding that the reason that Imperial did not hire the appellant was because he was not a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident, and its rejection of Imperial’s evidence that it was because he was dishonest about his status in Canada, was reasonable. The tribunal was not obliged to accept the evidence of Mr. Blysniuk in the face of the contradictory documentary record. The tribunal’s factual finding is owed deference.
[202] I do not accept Imperial’s submission on this issue. In explaining my reasons for this conclusion, I begin with the tribunal’s finding and its reasons on this issue.
(a) The tribunal’s reasons for finding that Imperial did not withdraw the job offer solely because of the appellant’s dishonesty [203] The tribunal acknowledged in its reasons that the appellant had conceded that he had misled Imperial on a number of occasions during the job competition process about his eligibility to work in Canada on a permanent basis.
[204] The tribunal reviewed the evidence led by Imperial on this issue, including the evidence of Mr. Blysniuk. The substance of Mr. Blysniuk’s evidence was that he considered the appellant’s file on January 4, 2015, and sent a direction by email that the December 2, 2014 conditional job offer to the appellant should be rescinded. By this time, the appellant had admitted to Imperial that he could not satisfy the condition in their offer (eligibility to work in Canada as proven by Canadian citizenship or permanent residence), and had requested an exception. Mr. Blysniuk testified that he made this decision on the basis of the appellant’s dishonesty and nothing else.
[205] The tribunal rejected Mr. Blysniuk’s evidence that the appellant’s dishonesty was the sole reason that the job offer was withdrawn. In coming to this credibility-based finding of fact, the tribunal placed particular emphasis on two aspects of the documentary record. First, there was no mention in the letter Imperial sent January 8, 2015 withdrawing the job offer that the appellant’s dishonesty was a factor in the withdrawal of the offer. The letter expressly stated that the job offer was being withdrawn because the appellant was unable to provide proof of Canadian citizenship or permanent residence to demonstrate his eligibility to permanently work in Canada. Second, there was no evidence in any internal correspondence of Imperial or its communications by phone and email with the appellant that it considered at any time waiving the requirement that to be eligible for the job the appellant had to be a Canadian citizen or permanent resident. In other words, had there been evidence that Imperial considered waiving that requirement, and chose not to do so solely based on the appellant’s dishonesty, that could have supported a conclusion that a discriminatory ground was not a factor in the decision to withdraw the job offer.
[206] In sum, the tribunal found that the documentary record was inconsistent with Mr. Blysniuk’s evidence that the sole reason the job offer was withdrawn was because of the appellant’s dishonesty. The tribunal found that (with the appellant having established a prima facie case of discrimination) “there is insufficient evidence to demonstrate on a balance of probabilities that the [appellant’s] dishonesty was the sole reason for his non-hire” (emphasis in original).
[207] The tribunal then referred to established jurisprudence that discrimination on a protected ground need not be the only factor involved in a decision not to hire, or even the primary factor, citing Janzen. The tribunal concluded that Imperial’s requirement of eligibility to work in Canada on a permanent basis, as proven by Canadian citizenship or permanent residence, “tainted the hiring process, resulting in discrimination in employment on the ground of citizenship.”
[208] The two judges in the majority of the Divisional Court did not address the issues related to the appellant lying about his status in Canada or whether the reason for the dismissal was solely due to the appellant lying about his status in Canada. Sachs J., in dissent in the result, found that the tribunal reasonably found that the appellant’s lying about his status was not the sole reason for the withdrawal of the job offer. In her view, despite Imperial’s oral evidence from Mr. Blysniuk, the tribunal’s conclusion that there was insufficient evidence to demonstrate that the appellant’s dishonesty was the sole reason for Imperial not hiring him was reasonable – particularly because the letter sent to the appellant withdrawing the job offer did not mention his dishonesty, but rather stated that the offer was being withdrawn because the appellant could not provide proof that he was either a Canadian citizen or permanent resident.
(b) The tribunal’s finding that Imperial did not withdraw the job offer solely because of the appellant’s dishonesty is reasonable [209] For substantially the same reasons as Sachs J., I am of the view that the tribunal’s finding that the appellant’s dishonesty during the job competition was not the sole reason that Imperial withdrew the job offer was reasonable and supported by the evidentiary record before it.
[210] As I have noted, Imperial argues that the tribunal’s finding that the appellant’s inability to fulfil Imperial’s requirement of permanent eligibility to work in Canada by proof of citizenship or permanent residency was unreasonable because there was “uncontradicted” evidence from Mr. Blysniuk that the reason that Imperial withdrew the job offer was because the appellant lied about his status in Canada, not because he was not a Canadian citizen or permanent resident.
[211] Imperial is incorrect that Mr. Blysniuk’s evidence was uncontradicted.
[212] As the tribunal noted, the letter that Imperial sent to the appellant withdrawing the job offer expressly stated that the job offer was being withdrawn because he was unable to meet the employment condition of permanent eligibility to work in Canada established by proof of either Canadian citizenship or permanent residence. The letter also invited the appellant to re-apply for work with Imperial if he became eligible to work permanently in Canada, and said that if he did so, Imperial “would be pleased to consider [his] application at that time.” The letter made no reference whatsoever to the appellant’s dishonesty about his status, and the invitation to reapply belies Imperial’s reliance on the appellant’s lies as the reason for withdrawing the job offer.
[213] Mr. Blysniuk’s evidence was contradicted by the documentary evidence – Imperial’s own letter.
[214] The tribunal accepted that there was some evidence that the appellant’s dishonestly may have played a role in Imperial’s decision to withdraw the job offer. But the tribunal did not accept that the lies were the only reason the job offer was withdrawn. The tribunal found that the appellant’s citizenship was a factor in Imperial’s decision to withdraw the job offer.
[215] It was open to the tribunal to prefer the contemporaneous documentary evidence about the reason for the withdrawal of the job offer over Mr. Blysniuk’s after-the-fact explanation.
[216] Further, the tribunal’s legal analysis about the impact of the appellant’s dishonesty about his eligibility to work permanently in Canada during the job competition was reasonable and consistent with human rights jurisprudence.
[217] The tribunal held that a discriminatory ground (citizenship) was a factor in the decision to withdraw the job offer. The tribunal further held that the fact that a non-discriminatory factor (the lies) may have also played a role did not insulate Imperial’s conduct from being discriminatory. As I have outlined above, only if the conduct alleged to be discriminatory was solely motivated by non-discriminatory factors can it rebut a prima facie case of discrimination.
[218] The tribunal’s finding that the appellant’s dishonesty was not the sole factor that motivated Imperial to withdraw the job offer was reasonable on the record before it.
(c) The tribunal did not erroneously shift the burden of proof to Imperial during the discrimination analysis [219] Imperial argues that the tribunal erroneously shifted the burden to it to prove that it did not discriminate against the appellant. Imperial submits that after it produced evidence from Mr. Blysniuk that the decision to withdraw the appellant’s job offer was motivated solely by his lies about his status, the appellant then produced no evidence to establish that Mr. Blysniuk’s evidence was false or pretextual. Imperial argues that having rebutted the appellant’s prima facie claim of discrimination, the burden of proof remained on the appellant to prove on a balance of probabilities that his dishonesty was not the sole reason that the job offer was withdrawn.
[220] I reject this argument. The tribunal discussed the burden of proof at the outset of its discrimination analysis, correctly stating that in human rights cases, the applicant has the onus of proving, on a balance of probabilities, that a violation of the Code has occurred. The initial onus is on the applicant to establish a prima facie case of discrimination on a prohibited ground on a balance of probabilities. If the applicant does so, an evidential burden shifts to the respondent to establish that there is an applicable statutory defence, or that there is a non-discriminatory explanation that provides the sole basis for the impugned treatment. If the respondent meets the onus to rebut the prima facie case of discrimination, then the onus shifts again to the applicant to establish that the respondent’s explanation is erroneous or is a pretext for discrimination. The tribunal correctly recognized that while the evidential burden may shift to the respondent during the analysis, the ultimate onus of proving discrimination remains on the appellant. I note that as recently as Midwives, this court found a similar application of the burden of proof to be reasonable: Midwives, at para. 149.
[221] Imperial takes issue with the following portion of the tribunal’s assessment of whether the appellant’s dishonesty was the sole reason that the job offer was withdrawn, arguing that it demonstrates an impermissible shifting of the burden:
In the result, the Tribunal finds that there is insufficient evidence to demonstrate on a balance of probabilities that the applicant’s dishonesty was the sole reason for his non-hire. [Emphasis in original.]
[222] I do not agree that this demonstrates an improper shifting of the burden of proof. The tribunal followed the established law regarding the burden of proof in discrimination claims. The tribunal found a prima facie case of discrimination on the basis of citizenship. Only then did the tribunal shift the burden to Imperial to show a non-discriminatory basis was the sole motivating factor for withdrawing the appellant’s job offer – in other words, that the decision was not tainted by discrimination on the basis of citizenship. This is clear throughout the tribunal’s reasons, including in the following passage, situated after the tribunal found that the appellant had established a prima facie case of discrimination on the basis of citizenship:
In the Tribunal’s view, given that a prima facie case has been established [Imperial] was required to provide a response to the allegation of discrimination by way of a statutory defence and/or credible non-discriminatory explanation for the impugned treatment. [Emphasis in original.]
[223] The tribunal then reasonably found that Imperial had failed to meet its evidential burden to show that the appellant’s dishonesty was the sole factor behind its decision to withdraw the job offer. Imperial provided oral evidence from Mr. Blysniuk to support its argument, but, as above, the tribunal reasonably found that his oral evidence was contradicted by Imperial’s recission letter. Accordingly, Imperial did not satisfy its evidential burden to establish a non-discriminatory reason for the impugned treatment, and thus the appellant was not required, at this stage of the analysis, to demonstrate that Imperial’s alleged non-discriminatory basis for the appellant’s treatment was false or pretextual.
[224] The tribunal’s application of the burden of proof was thus reasonable and consistent with the applicable law.
(4) Was the tribunal’s decision that the defence under s. 16(1) of the Code was not available to Imperial reasonable? [225] Imperial argues that the tribunal’s conclusion that the defence under s. 16(1) of the Code was not available to Imperial was unreasonable because no reasons were given for that conclusion. Imperial argues that according to Vavilov, reasons “are the primary mechanism by which administrative decision makers show that their decisions are reasonable” and that the absence of reasons raises issues of procedural fairness and whether a decision is substantively reasonable: Vavilov, at para. 81.
[226] I reject Imperial’s argument. Imperial failed to raise the s. 16(1) defence before the tribunal. It should not be permitted to raise it for the first time on review.
[227] Imperial did not raise a s. 16(1) defence before the tribunal. In its response to the appellant’s claim, Imperial pleaded that the appellant did not have standing to bring the claim and that its decision to withdraw the job offer was based on his not being able to work in Canada on a permanent basis and not on the prohibited ground of citizenship.[12] In the alternative, it pleaded a BFOR defence, pursuant to s. 11 of the Code. Imperial did not raise a s. 16(1) defence in its response.
[228] Nor did Imperial raise the s. 16(1) defence during the tribunal hearing. On the final day of evidence before the tribunal, prior to an adjournment for hearing of submissions, counsel for the appellant asked whether Imperial was raising a defence under s. 16 of the Code, because she did not want to be taken by surprise and because it might require reopening the hearing for more evidence. Counsel for Imperial undertook to notify counsel for the appellant prior to submissions if he was raising a s. 16 defence. When the hearing resumed approximately six weeks later, Imperial did not assert a s. 16 defence in its submissions. Indeed, during submissions, Imperial expressly took the position that it was not relying on the s. 16(1) defence. Rather, Imperial argued that the appellant did not have standing to bring the claim; that the job offer was withdrawn only because the appellant lied; that if there was discrimination, it was on the basis of immigration status, which is not a prohibited ground; and that if there was discrimination on the prohibited ground of citizenship, Imperial had a BFOR defence.
[229] Imperial attempted to raise the s. 16(1) defence in its application for judicial review. The majority of the Divisional Court did not address s. 16(1). Sachs J., in dissent, held that Imperial should not be permitted to raise the s. 16(1) issue on the review when it had not raised the issue before the tribunal.
[230] It is clear that Imperial’s decision not to raise the s. 16(1) defence before the tribunal was a tactical decision. When asked by this court during submissions about the reason for not raising the s. 16(1) defence before the tribunal, counsel for Imperial (who was also counsel before the tribunal) advised that the defence was not raised before the tribunal because raising it would have been inconsistent with and undermined Imperial’s position that the sole reason for withdrawing the job offer was the appellant’s dishonesty about his status in Canada. Counsel also said the s. 16(1) defence was not raised below because Imperial took the position that the appellant did not have standing to bring his claim and that if there was discrimination it was on the basis of “immigration status” and not the appellant’s citizenship. These are all tactical reasons Imperial chose not to raise the s. 16(1) defence.
[231] I pause to note that there is nothing in the tribunal’s Rules of Procedure, nor the Common Rules of Tribunals Ontario, that prohibits alternate pleadings.
[232] Imperial should not now be permitted to change the footing of its defence on judicial review. In addition to the premise that a party should not ordinarily be permitted to raise a new issue on appeal, particular concerns arise in the judicial review context because of the reviewing court’s role vis-à-vis the tribunal.
[233] The legislature made the decision to entrust adjudication of human rights claims to the tribunal, subject to review by the courts. Where an issue is not raised before the tribunal, there is no decision on an issue to review. Further, the premise of judicial review starting with “respectful attention” to an administrative decision-maker’s reasons cannot be applied where an issue was not raised below, and the tribunal was not given the opportunity to consider the issue and provide reasons.
[234] One difficulty with allowing Imperial to raise the issue for the first time on judicial review is evident. Imperial faults the tribunal for giving insufficient reasons in rejecting a s. 16(1) defence. This is a mischaracterization of what the tribunal did in relation to s. 16(1).
[235] In two places in its reasons, the tribunal briefly states that Imperial’s policy was “not excused” by s. 16(1) of the Code and that the defence under s. 16(1) of the Code was “not available”. No reasons were provided for these statements. Given that Imperial had been asked whether it would argue a s. 16(1) defence, and chose not to raise it, these passages can only be read as the tribunal finding that the defence was not available because Imperial chose not to raise it. This interpretation of the tribunal’s reasons has particular force because it would have been Imperial’s burden to establish this affirmative defence in light of the established law about the burden of proof in human rights claims, discussed above. Obviously, Imperial could not meet its burden to establish a defence under s. 16(1) when it chose not to rely on that defence before the tribunal.
[236] In the present appeal, it was reasonable for the tribunal not to consider the s. 16(1) defence, since Imperial chose not to assert it.
[237] Because the s. 16(1) issue was not raised by Imperial at first instance, it is beyond the scope of this appeal to pronounce on the scope of that statutory defence. Further, the court does not have a record before it in this appeal that would permit consideration of the variety of situations in which the s. 16(1) defence may be applicable. The scope of application of the s. 16(1) defence in the context of discrimination in employment on grounds of citizenship appears to be to a large extent driven by federal immigration law[13] (“imposed or authorized by law”); however, there is no record before the court of what, if any, other types of status in Canada allow an unrestricted right to work.
[238] Neither this court nor the Divisional Court has considered the interpretation of the s. 16(1) defence.[14] In light of the concerns I have discussed about the defence not having been raised before the tribunal and it being an issue of first impression in the courts, the interpretation of the s. 16(1) defence is better left for a case where the issue is raised and considered by the tribunal.
G. Conclusion [239] I am satisfied that the tribunal’s decision is reasonable. It demonstrates a coherent chain of reasoning that is justified in relation to the factual record before the tribunal and the legal constraints relevant to the issues before it.
[240] Accordingly, I would allow the appeal, set aside the Divisional Court decision, and restore the order of the tribunal. As agreed by the parties, Imperial shall pay costs of the appeal to the appellant in the amount of $15,000, inclusive of disbursements and applicable taxes.
[241] The parties did not address costs of the Divisional Court proceedings before this court. If the parties are unable to agree on costs of the proceedings before the Divisional Court, they may make written submissions not exceeding three pages each. The submissions of the appellant shall be delivered within 15 days after the release of these reasons. The submissions of Imperial shall be delivered within 15 days after the receipt of those of the appellant.
Released: May 23, 2023 “KMvR”
“J. Copeland J.A.”
“I agree. K. van Rensburg J.A.”
“I agree. Sossin J.A.”
[1] I base this description of the PGWP program on the tribunal’s findings. These findings were based on expert evidence before the tribunal. See also Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations, SOR/2002-227, ss. 87.1, 186, 199, 205, enacted pursuant to s. 14 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c. 27.
[2] The appellant’s application to the tribunal also raised place of origin and ethnic origin as grounds of discrimination; however, these grounds were not pursued by the appellant at the tribunal hearing.
[3] There is a more limited BFOR defence for some circumstances of direct discrimination in the context of “special employment” in s. 24 of the Code. However, none of the defences in s. 24 would apply to the circumstances of this case, and Imperial did not raise s. 24 at any point in this litigation.
[4] The partial discrimination principle is not expressly discussed in Meiorin. However, the evidence was clear that some women were capable of passing the physical fitness requirement that was found to constitute adverse impact discrimination. The discrimination arose out of the fact that the policy impacted women differently (and negatively) compared to men. The fact that not all women were so affected did not render the policy non-discriminatory.
[5] These cases were decided prior to the inclusion of “marital status” in the relevant human rights legislation. See discussion of this type of policy in Tomen v. O.T.F. (No. 4), 1994 CanLII 18431 (Ont. H.R.T.), at paras. 262-67. This type of policy was found to be discrimination on the basis of sex in Ferguson v. Cape Breton District School Board, 1986 CanLII 6514 (N.S.H.R.C.), aff’d (1987), N.S.R. (2d) 106 (C.A.).
[6] The “permanence requirement” was defined earlier in the reasons to refer to Imperial’s policy that a condition of employment for the position at issue was eligibility “to work in Canada on a permanent basis”.
[7] At the same time, citizenship was also added as a protected ground under ss. 1-3 and 5, prohibiting discrimination in services, accommodation, contracts, and vocational assessments.
[8] As a technical matter, the prohibitions on discrimination are created by s. 9 and 11 of the Code. However, the grounds on which discrimination in employment is prohibited are defined in s. 5.
[9] A portion of s. 16(2) applies indirectly to the employment context, to the extent it applies to “trade union…activities”; however, by its text, s. 16(2) is not directly applicable to allegations of discrimination by employers or potential employers (except, perhaps, employers involved in cultural, educational, or athletic activities). That said, the existence and scope of the s. 16(2) defence also supports a broad reading of the scope of discrimination on the basis of “citizenship” in s. 5. This is for the same reason that I articulate in relation to s. 16(1) and (3) – that the legislature would not have enacted these defences if the scope of discrimination on the basis of “citizenship” were as narrow as conceived of by the Divisional Court majority.
[10] And I pause to note that, were federal immigration policy to change, that is a matter which could be considered in a given case in assessing the availability of a defence under s. 16(1) of the Code.
[11] I pause to note that certain comments of Lederer J. in the Divisional Court could be read as suggesting that statistical evidence is always required to support a claim of adverse impact discrimination. That is not the case. What is required to establish a claim of adverse impact discrimination is that the policy, which is neutral on its face, adversely impacts a group of employees who are members of a group against whom discrimination is prohibited (race, gender, etc.). In some cases, statistical evidence will be required to establish the adverse impact – for example the physical fitness standards in Meiorin. In other cases, statistical evidence will not be necessary to show the adverse impact – for example, adverse impact discrimination on the basis of religion caused by Sunday being the only closing day, or a refusal to allow accommodation for religious observance of holidays which are not statutory holidays. In the latter situation, evidence about the employee’s religious beliefs will be required, but not statistical evidence. See also Fraser, at paras. 56-67.
[12] At the tribunal hearing, Imperial added as a defence that the reason that the job offer was withdrawn was because the appellant lied to Imperial. However, this was not its position in its written response to the claim.
[13] The text of s. 16 encompasses “a requirement, qualification or consideration authorized or imposed by law”, whether the law is federal or provincial. However, in the context of discrimination in employment on grounds of citizenship, it appears that the most likely source would be federal law, in particular, IRPA.
[14] Without opining on the correctness of the analysis, I note that the leading decision of the tribunal regarding the interpretation of the s. 16(1) defence in the context of discrimination in employment is Koenig v. University of Toronto, 2012 HRTO 767. The s. 16(1) issue in Koenig arose in the context of an allegation that the university’s job advertisements were discriminatory. The advertisements stated: “All qualified candidates are encouraged to apply, however, Canadians and permanent residents will be given priority.” The claimant alleged that the preference for Canadian citizens was discriminatory. The university argued that the s. 16(1) and 16(2) defences applied such that there was no discrimination on the basis of citizenship. The tribunal agreed with the university that the s. 16(1) defence applied (and declined to rule on the s. 16(2) defence). The tribunal accepted the university’s argument, based on the record before it, that as a matter of federal law, prior to hiring a foreign national in Canada, the university was required to apply for a Labour Market Opinion from Human Resources and Skills Development Canada. In addition, also as a matter of federal law, there were guidelines for advertising such jobs, including that job postings must include the type of statement about priority for Canadian citizens and permanent residents that the claimant challenged. The tribunal accepted the university’s argument that the s. 16(1) defence applied in these circumstances because the priority in the advertisement for Canadian citizens and permanent residents was a requirement imposed by law. I note that the expert evidence before the tribunal in the present appeal was that no Labour Market Opinion (now known as a Labour Market Impact Assessment) is required before an employer can hire a PGWP-holder.

Benchwood Builders, Inc. v. Prescott
Collection
Decisions of the Court of Appeal
Date
2025-03-06
Neutral citation
2025 ONCA 171
Docket numbers
COA-24-CV-0130
Judges
Lauwers, Peter D.; Brown, David M.; Coroza, Steve A.
Subject
Civil
Decision Content
COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO
CITATION: Benchwood Builders, Inc. v. Prescott, 2025 ONCA 171
DATE: 20250306
DOCKET: COA-24-CV-0130
Lauwers, Brown and Coroza JJ.A.
BETWEEN
Benchwood Builders, Inc. and Michael Slaven
Plaintiffs (Appellants)
and
Cynthia Prescott and David Green
Defendants (Respondents)
Adrienne Zaya and Sara J. Erskine, for the appellants
Sheldon Inkol, for the respondents
Heard: October 29, 2024
On appeal from the order of Justice Linda M. Walters of the Superior Court of Justice, dated January 3, 2024[1] and from the costs order dated April 12, 2024.
Lauwers J.A.:
A. Overview [1] Cynthia Prescott and David Green contracted with Benchwood Builders, Inc., owned by Michael Slaven and his spouse, to carry out some renovations on their home in Niagara-on-the-Lake.[2] The relationship ended badly with Benchwood starting a lien action to recover for unpaid bills. Benchwood and Mr. Slaven started this defamation action for derogatory comments that Ms. Prescott and Mr. Green made about them on social media. In response, Ms. Prescott and Mr. Green brought a motion for an order dismissing the action as a Strategic Lawsuit Against Public Participation (“SLAPP”) under s. 137.1 of the Courts of Justice Act.[3]
[2] The motion judge granted the anti-SLAPP motion and dismissed Benchwood’s defamation action. For the reasons that follow, I would allow the appeal.
(1) The Factual Context [3] About a month after they parted company, Ms. Prescott and Mr. Green saw that Benchwood had posted photographs of their home online in order to attract new customers. This angered them and they posted statements and complaints online, some of which Benchwood and Mr. Slaven assert to be defamatory.
[4] The alleged defamatory statements posted by Ms. Prescott are these: Benchwood and Mr. Slaven “misrepresent themselves to the consumer”; that her experience with them as builders was “horrific” and a “nightmare”; “[t]hey are misrepresenting our project as a ‘success story’ which it definitely IS NOT”; “[t]hese are just a few pix of the utter mess they left behind despite our having paid them an extraordinary amount & we’re having to clean up after them at great cost.” Ms. Prescott also posted that Mr. Slaven and his subcontractors were “in on this dishonest operation together”, “operate in a dishonest manner,” and did a “shotty job”.
[5] In addition to Ms. Prescott’s posts, Mr. Green responded to several comments on the Benchwood Facebook page. In response to one user, he wrote: “let me guess.. he had to charge you extra for a few things? project was a nightmare? glad it’s done? aware of the lawsuits?” Mr. Green also posted that Benchwood was “trespassing”, referred to Mr. Slaven as “a miserable con artist” and a “dirtbag”, implied that Benchwood had a habit of walking off the job, and accused Mr. Slaven of threatening women and making false assault charges against women. These comments were posted to social media by the Homeowners between November 2020 and January 2021.
[6] Ms. Prescott and Mr. Green admit making the statements but say that most of the postings were removed within minutes, except for one that stayed up for several hours. There is some dispute about how long the postings were up on social media. Their defence is that “all of the statements …are true, fair comments, justified, honest opinions, subject to qualified privilege, are responsible communication on matters of public interest.” The motion judge summarized the defence, at para. 39: “the statements in question are either true, fair comment, protected by qualified privilege, statute barred, or not capable of harming the plaintiffs’ reputation.”
(2) The Motion Judge’s Decision [7] The motion judge dismissed Benchwood’s defamation action under s. 137.1, based on three findings.
[8] First, the Homeowners’ comments related to a matter of public interest because Benchwood offers services to the public and customer reviews online are “widely utilized” – s. 137.1(3).
[9] Second, while there were grounds to believe that Benchwood’s defamation action had substantial merit – s. 137.1(4)(a)(i) – there were triable issues with respect to the Homeowners’ defence that the statements they made were true; because the motion judge was unable to find that the Homeowners’ defence of justification had no real prospect of success, Benchwood’s claim had to be dismissed – s. 137.1(4)(a)(ii).
[10] Third, she considered whether the harm to Benchwood was serious enough as to outweigh the public interest in protecting the Homeowners’ expression – s. 137.1(4)(b). She found that Benchwood had failed to establish that any harm suffered as a result of the Homeowners’ defamatory statements was serious, because there were “other factors that may have had an effect on [Benchwood’s] reputation.”
B. The Issues [11] Benchwood raises the following issues:
1. Did the motion judge err in finding that the Homeowners’ statements relate to a matter of public interest under s. 137.1(3)?
2. Did she err in her approach to the ground of “no valid defence” under s. 137.1(4)(a)(ii)?
3. Did she err in her approach to the weighing exercise relating to harm and the public interest under s. 137.1(4)(b)?
4. Did she err in her costs award?
C. Analysis [12] In my view, the motion judge made three errors. First, the dispute is not a matter of public interest under s. 137.1. Second, the motion judge did not undertake the task of assessing the validity of the Homeowners’ defence in a manner consistent with this court’s guidance. Third, she carried out the task of weighing harm against the public interest only perfunctorily.
[13] In this part of the reasons, I interpret s. 137.1 in light of its text, context and purpose, and its scheme, and then turn to the issues.
The Interpretation of Section 137.1 of the Courts of Justice Act
[14] Section 137.1 of the Courts of Justice Act is poorly drafted and confusing. It has led to much litigation, which is ironic since its express purposes are to discourage the use of litigation as a means of unduly limiting expression on matters of public interest and to promote public participation in debates on such matters: ss. 137.1(1) (b) and (c). The Byzantine operation of the section has been criticized.[4] In short, s. 137.1 is in desperate need of a makeover, if not repeal and replacement.
Text, Context, and Purpose
[15] The governing principle of statutory interpretation is this: “Those who draft and enact statutes expect that questions about their meaning will be resolved by an analysis that has regard to the text, context and purpose”.[5] The court must consider the text of the legislation, the context within which it operates along with the specific case context, and the particular purpose for the provisions at issue.
[16] The text of s. 137.1 on “public interest” does not define the term but leaves it to the courts to develop in light of the section’s purpose.
[17] The purpose of s. 137.1 can be gleaned from its express terms, especially s. 137.1(1). Our court has adopted this general description of the purpose of the legislation: “the anti- SLAPP legislation was designed to stop a plaintiff from silencing a defendant by pursuing meritless litigation that served to intimidate and undermine public expression”.[6]
[18] The general context is plain enough: s. 137.1 presupposes active litigation of possibly questionable value. The specific context in this appeal is a commercial dispute in which one party might have defamed the other, which requires me to comment briefly on the values underlying defamation as a cause of action, on the one hand, and the value of free expression, on the other hand.
[19] Peter Downard summarizes the purpose of the law of defamation in two dense and well footnoted paragraphs in Halsbury’s Laws of Canada – “Defamation” (2023 Reissue):
Protection of reputation. The Canadian law of defamation compensates and vindicates a person whose reputation in the community has been harmed by a false statement. Canadian law recognizes that reputation is an integral and fundamentally important aspect of every individual. Reputation fosters self-image and self-worth. Reputation is closely linked to the ability of the individual to participate in Canadian society. The Supreme Court of Canada has thus recognized that the protection of reputation has “quasi-constitutional status” in Canadian law.
Emotional security and dignity. The law of defamation also exists to provide a remedy for the harm that the defendant’s wrong has caused to the plaintiff’s feelings. Respect for the inherent dignity of a person is essential in a free and democratic society. (Footnotes omitted.)[7]
[20] People are entitled to defend their reputations, even in the rough and tumble of social media.
[21] Free speech is constitutionally protected from state intrusion by s. 2(b) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. The purpose of protecting freedom of expression is to “ensure that everyone can manifest their thoughts, opinions, beliefs, indeed all expressions of the heart and mind, however unpopular, distasteful or contrary to the mainstream.”[8]
[22] Free expression is not unlimited; one constraint is defamation law. “The publication of defamatory comments constitutes an invasion of the individual’s personal privacy and is an affront to that person’s dignity.”[9] Protecting reputation – as an aspect of dignity – must be “carefully balanced against the equally important right of freedom of expression.”[10] The Supreme Court found in WIC Radio (2008) that “the worth and dignity of each individual, including reputation, is an important value underlying the Charter and is to be weighed in the balance with freedom of expression.”[11] The court affirmed the tension between reputation and free speech: “the Charter is about ‘expressive activity’ but it also protects the dignity and worth of individuals, whose reputation may be their most valued asset.”[12]
[23] This tension exists in the context of anti-SLAPP motions and is recognized especially in s. 137.1(4)(b).
The Scheme of s. 137.1
[24] The language of s. 137.1 is obtuse and difficult to follow. To help work through how the provisions of s. 137.1 apply to this case, I substitute the names of the parties and add pertinent details. Subsection (3) requires the motion judge to dismiss the defamation action under certain conditions; It provides:
(3) On motion by [the Homeowners] against whom [the defamation] proceeding is brought, a judge shall, subject to subsection (4), dismiss the proceeding against the [Homeowners] if the [Homeowners] satisf[y] the judge that the proceeding arises from an expression made by [the Homeowners] that relates to a matter of public interest.
[25] At the threshold, the Homeowners must establish that: (i) they expressed themselves; (ii) their expression relates to a matter of public interest; and (iii) the Benchwood defamation action which the Homeowners seek to have dismissed arises from their expression.[13]
[26] One sticking point in this action, to which I return below, is whether the Homeowners’ “expression,” as defined in s. 137.1, engages a matter of “public interest” as that undefined term is understood in s. 137.1.
[27] If the threshold is passed, then subsection (4) springs into convoluted action, but the onus shifts to the party allegedly defamed, Benchwood. Subsection (4) provides:
(4) A judge shall not dismiss [Benchwood’s defamation] proceeding under subsection (3) if [Benchwood] satisfies the judge that,
(a) there are grounds to believe that,
(i) the [defamation] proceeding has substantial merit, and
(ii) the moving party [the Homeowners] ha[ve] no valid defence in the [defamation] proceeding; and
(b) the harm likely to be or have been suffered by the responding party [Benchwood] as a result of the moving party [the Homeowners’] expression is sufficiently serious that the public interest in permitting [Benchwood’s defamation] proceeding to continue outweighs the public interest in protecting [the Homeowners’] expression.
[28] As I will explain, in my view s.137.1 (4)(a)(ii) – “no valid defence” – has been given too much weight in the operation of the section. It is better seen as no more than an obvious off-ramp for those cases in which there are clearly grounds to believe that a valid defence to the entire defamation action exists; in such cases, the defamed party has failed to meet the onus under s. 137.1 and the underlying defamation proceeding should be dismissed.[14] Such open and shut cases will be rare.
[29] But what happens when the judge is only satisfied that the defamer might have a valid defence? Some cases have placed too high a burden on the defamed plaintiff. In my view, it is an error to conclude that because the responding party – the defamed party in the underlying proceeding – is not able to utterly invalidate the defence, the motion to dismiss must be granted.[15]
[30] To the contrary, when the judge hearing the anti-SLAPP motion is satisfied that the defence has some merit but is not satisfied that it will prevail, then the analysis must proceed to the weighing exercise in s. 137.1(4)(b). I note that (a) is followed by “;and (b)” , which signals that the legislature intended the analysis to go from (a) to (b).
[31] Under s 137.1(4)(b), the motion judge ultimately decides whether to permit the defamation action to continue. To permit the action to proceed, the judge must be satisfied that the harm suffered by the responding party who claims to have been defamed as a result of the moving party’s purportedly defamatory expression is sufficiently serious that the public interest in permitting the defamation proceeding to continue outweighs the public interest in protecting the purportedly defamatory expression.
[32] With this statutory scheme in mind, I turn to the particular issues raised in this appeal.
(1) The motion judge erred in finding that the Homeowners’ statements relate to a matter of public interest under s. 137.1(3) [33] The motion judge found that the “expressions in question relate to a matter of public interest”. She cited a colleague’s statement that “[o]nline reviews serve an important function by offering the public information about consumer experiences dealing with professionals or businesses” and are matters of public interest.[16] This seems to be a consensus view of Superior Court judges,[17] but it is not the view of this court[18] whose legal rulings prevail. The motion judge made an error of law in failing to follow this court’s rulings on the interpretation of the “public interest” in s. 137.1.
[34] Online reviews of products and services are part of the pervasive social media milieux in which contemporary society operates. However, “[s]ocial media is not a defamation-free zone” nor do participants “consent to the risk of being defamed”.[19] With these words, Huscroft J.A. qualified the lower court judge’s observation that social media is often a nasty place; Morgan J. described one manifestation, Twitter, as “a rhetorically harsh speech environment whose very pervasive harshness reduces the seriousness with which it is taken”.[20]
[35] Section 137.1 encourages expression on matters of public interest, such as participation in debates on matters of public interest, which are protected by s. 137.1(3). But not every public expression “relates to a matter of public interest,” as Huscroft J.A. pointed out in Sokoloff, at para. 19:
[I]t is not enough if expression simply makes reference to something that is of public interest, or to something that arouses the public’s curiosity. Moreover, the court’s instruction of interpretive generosity cannot be read in isolation. The scope for legitimate interpretation of vaguely worded concepts such as “public interest” must be informed by the purpose of the legislation: to safeguard the fundamental value that is public participation in democracy. The burden is on the moving party to establish that its expression relates to a matter of public interest, albeit that this burden is not an onerous one.
[36] The Supreme Court said in Grant v. Torstar Corp. that:
To be of public interest, the subject matter “must be shown to be one inviting public attention, or about which the public has some substantial concern because it affects the welfare of citizens, or one to which considerable public notoriety or controversy has attached”: Brown, vol. 2, at pp. 15-137 and 15-138. The case law on fair comment “is replete with successful fair comment defences on matters ranging from politics to restaurant and book reviews”: Simpson v. Mair, 2004 BCSC 754, 31 B.C.L.R. (4th) 285, at para. 63, per Koenigsberg J. Public interest may be a function of the prominence of the person referred to in the communication, but mere curiosity or prurient interest is not enough. Some segment of the public must have a genuine stake in knowing about the matter published.[21]
[37] The court applied Grant’s approach to s. 137.1 in 1704604 Ontario Ltd. v. Pointes Protection Association.[22]
[38] In Pointes, Côté J. said, at para. 30:
Ultimately, the inquiry is a contextual one that is fundamentally asking what the expression is really about. The animating purpose of s. 137.1 should not be forgotten: s. 137.1 was enacted to circumscribe proceedings that adversely affect expression made in relation to matters of public interest, in order to protect that expression and safeguard the fundamental value that is public participation in democracy.
[39] Pointes itself concerned an individual’s testimony in administrative proceedings before a land use tribunal, which was found to be protected as “an expression on a matter of public interest”.[23]
[40] This court has considered the “public interest” as related to online reviews of goods or services on several occasions. Online reviews are not automatically matters of public interest. As Huscroft J.A. noted in Sokoloff, at para. 32:
The task of the motion judge under s. 137.1(3) is to determine “what the expression is really about”, bearing in mind the purpose of s. 137.1: protecting expression relating to matters of public interest and safeguarding the fundamental value of public participation in democracy: Pointes (SCC), at para. 30. Again, only expression relating to a matter of public interest attracts the statute’s protection; “expression that simply makes reference to something of public interest” does not: Pointes (SCC), at para. 29.
[41] This court noted in Grist, at para. 19, that “the resolution of purely private disputes between more or less equals – disputes that have no immediate bearing on the rights or obligations of others – can seldom be a matter of public interest.”[24] This court’s decisions that have found an expression to relate to a purely private dispute include the following: Echelon (an employee posted an online review of internal workplace conditions, pay, and benefits); Sokoloff (the president of a company stood outside a law firm with signs claiming that the firm had failed to pay his company for fees incurred by the firm’s clients); Hamilton (a client posted an “unflattering opinion” about her lawyer online); and Dent-X Canada (a client posted a review of Dent-X on Facebook that included allegations of fraud).[25] The result in these cases is that the anti-SLAPP motion was not granted and the defamation action was left to continue.
[42] There are some cases involving online reviews or activities that rise above the purely private: Canadian Union of Postal Workers (an expression that dealt with “the use of union funds to take positions on the conflict in the Middle East or to help an organization that allegedly supports attacks on Israel”); Thatcher-Craig (expressions related to municipal land use matters); Levant (expressions related to climate change); Hamer (expressions about animal welfare); and VAC Developments Limited (expressions about anti-Black racism and workplace harassment).[26] Common to each of these cases is an expression that engages some broader societal concern.
[43] Assessing this case against the spectrum of cases reflected in the preceding two paragraphs leads me to conclude that the online reviews posted by the Homeowners reflect no more than an especially bitter private dispute. Consequently, although some members of the public might find it interesting, it is not a matter of public interest under s 137.1. The expression at issue does not engage some broader societal concern, such as those described above, nor, in my view, does it fall within the types of expression that were intended to be captured by the provision.
(2) The motion judge erred in her approach to the ground of “no valid defence” under s. 137.1(4)(a)(ii) [44] Section 137.1(4)(a)(ii) has proved to be the most problematic of the section’s provisions. I begin with the text, which provides:
(4) A judge shall not dismiss [Benchwood’s defamation] proceeding under subsection (3) if the responding party [Benchwood] satisfies the judge that,
(a) there are grounds to believe that,
…
(ii) the moving party [the Homeowners] ha[ve] no valid defence in the [defamation] proceeding; and [Emphasis added.]
[45] Does s.137.1(4)(a)(ii) provide an off-ramp allowing a judge to grant the anti‑SLAPP motion without proceeding to the weighing exercise required by s. 137.1(4)(b)?
[46] Consider two scenarios: 1) The responding party to the anti-SLAPP motion, here Benchwood, shows that the moving party, the Homeowners, have no valid defence to the defamation action; or 2) Benchwood is able to establish only that the Homeowners might not have a valid defence to the defamation action.
[47] Textually, the emphasized word “and” at the end of s. 137.1 (4)(a) requires the judge to advert to s. 137.1(4)(b) regardless of the scenario. The second scenario, in which the defamer might have a defence, has proven troublesome. Some judges have treated the second scenario as though a valid defence exists: If the defamed party cannot show that it has an open and shut case against the defamer – that is, cannot show that “the moving party has no valid defence” – then the defamation action must be dismissed as an anti-SLAPP action and the purported defamer escapes.[27] This was the mistaken approach the motion judge took in this case.
[48] It was mistaken for four reasons: First, it effectively reads s. 137.1 (4)(b) out of the section by entirely ignoring the pregnant “and” at the end of s. 137.1 (4)(a).
[49] Second, in so doing, the mistaken approach ignores the decisions that hold the weighing exercise in s. 137.1(4)(b) is to be the “fundamental crux” of the court’s analysis.[28]
[50] Third, the dynamic of the weighing exercise in s. 137.1(4)(b) more carefully assesses the competing interests of free speech on the one hand, and defamation law’s reputational protection on the other hand, in the fact specific context of a case.
[51] Fourth, I am of the view that the Supreme Court’s decision in Bent calls for a more nuanced approach to s. 137.1(4)(a)(ii). In the case of a defamation action, the responding party need only show grounds to believe that the defences do not tend to weigh more in the moving party’s favour.[29]
[52] My interpretation of s.137.1(4)(a)(ii) in the context of the whole section and particularly the weighing exercise required by s. 137.1(4)(b) might seem to be inconsistent with some of Côté J.’s words in Pointes, at para. 58:
The word no [in (ii)] is absolute, and the corollary is that if there is any defence that is valid, then the plaintiff has not met its burden and the underlying claim should be dismissed.
[53] I would distinguish Pointes. In my view, these words cannot be applied easily in the context of a defamation claim, as applicable as they might have been to Pointes itself, which was a contract dispute. I say this for several reasons. First, the intricate nature of a defamation action and the plethora of possible defences makes such a categorical approach to s. 137.1(4)(a)(ii) both problematic and unjust. It is difficult to analyze a statement or set of statements in such a categorical fashion. In this case, for example, there were several allegedly defamatory statements. The defence of justification or truth might be available for some, none, or perhaps all, of the statements. The categorical approach does not comprehend such a mixed set of possible outcomes. Quite the opposite, since the literal application of Côté J.’s words is that any valid defence to any of the allegedly defamatory statements would lead to a dismissal of the entire defamation action.
[54] Second, a defamatory statement might be true at some level, but the problem is less the truth of the statement than what has sometimes been referred to as the “sting” of the words, evident in the presence of malice.
[55] Third, the categorical approach raises the stakes in an anti-SLAPP motion and encourages the development of an enormous record exploring every possible defence at length. Such a comprehensive approach is completely inconsistent with the intended summary nature of anti-SLAPP motions. Indeed, Côté J.’s statement quoted immediately above, was followed by these lines:
As with the substantial merit prong, the motion judge here must make a determination of validity on a limited record at an early stage in the litigation process – accordingly, this context should be taken into account in assessing whether a defence is valid. The motion judge must therefore be able to engage in a limited assessment of the evidence in determining the validity of the defence.
[56] I see these instructions as inconsistent with the categorical approach posited in the first statement with respect to defamation actions.
[57] Further, this court has observed that anti-SLAPP motions have “been misused as a costly and time-consuming surrogate for a summary judgment motion” in defamation actions.[30] They are not to be “a new form of summary trial on the merits of a defamation action”.[31] Brown J.A. recently commented that anti-SLAPP motions “are not designed or appropriate” for cases in which “any determination on the merits will patently require a deep dive into the evidence and the making of extensive findings of credibility.”[32]
[58] I am therefore confident that Côté J. understood the need for a more nuanced analysis and did not intend for such a categorical approach to apply in defamation actions.
[59] I conclude that the preferable approach to take to anti-SLAPP motions in defamation actions, where it is not immediately clear that there is no valid defence, is to move smartly to the weighing exercise in s. 137.1(4)(b). After all, it is intended to be the “fundamental crux” of the court’s analysis.
(3) The motion judge erred in her approach to the weighing exercise relating to harm and the public interest under s. 137.1(4)(b) [60] I repeat the text for convenience:
(4) A judge shall not dismiss [Benchwood’s defamation] proceeding under subsection (3) if the responding party [Benchwood] satisfies the judge that,
…
(b) the harm likely to be or have been suffered by the responding party [Benchwood] as a result of the moving party’s [the Homeowners’] expression is sufficiently serious that the public interest in permitting the [Benchwood’s defamation] proceeding to continue outweighs the public interest in protecting [the Homeowner’s] expression.
[61] I address first the governing principles and then their application in this case.
(a) The Governing Principles Underpinning s. 137.1(4)(b) [62] The public interest weighing stage is the crux of the anti-SLAPP analysis.[33]
[63] Unlike the initial public interest requirement under s 137.1 (3), the focus at this stage is “what is really going on” in the case; it is necessary to assess the quality of the expression, including the motivation behind it, the medium through which it was expressed, and its subject matter.[34]
[64] The closer an expression is to any of the fundamental values of s. 2(b) of the Charter – freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression – the greater the public interest will be in protecting it.[35] The cases have identified several factors:
• Personal attacks and defamatory statements are only remotely related to these core values.[36] Consequently, there is less public interest in protecting these types of expressions.[37]
• Statements that are exaggerated or inaccurate, or contain deliberate misrepresentations also reduce the public interest protection afforded to those expressions.[38]
• Expressions made for the purpose of interfering with another’s ability to express their views may also attract less public interest protection.[39]
• The motivation behind the subject expressions can lower the public interest in protecting the expression.[40]
• The presence of “classic SLAPP” indicia, which include: whether the plaintiff has a history of using litigation or the threat of litigation to silence critics; a financial or power imbalance that strongly favours the plaintiff; a punitive or retributory purpose animating the action; and minimal or nominal damages suffered by the plaintiff.[41]
(b) Application of the Governing Principles to this Appeal [65] The motion judge undertook the analysis required by s. 137.1(4)(b) in case the analysis leading her to dismiss the action under s. 137.1(4)(a)(ii) – no valid defence – was wrong. She went on to find that Benchwood had failed to establish that any harm suffered as a result of the Homeowners’ defamatory statements was serious, because there were “other factors that may have had an effect on [Benchwood’s] reputation,” citing Pointes, at para. 72: “[E]vidence of a causal link between the expression and harm will be especially important where there may be sources other than the defendant’s expression that may have caused the plaintiff harm.”
[66] As the motion judge noted, one key problem for Benchwood is that several of the negative events cited as harming Benchwood’s business seem to have preceded the Homeowners’ postings, including the non-renewal of Benchwood’s membership in the Niagara Home Builders’ Association in October 2020, which came about as the result of customer complaints. Further, the harms asserted, such as contract cancellations, were not backed up by evidence that the Homeowners’ postings were the cause. The Benchwood firm “appears to be doing well”.
[67] The Homeowners’ statements concerned a home renovation gone wrong. The postings did not relate to a matter of public interest or to safeguarding the fundamental value of public participation in democracy, to which personal attacks and defamatory statements are only remotely related. This was a private dispute. I repeat what this court said in Grist: “the resolution of purely private disputes between more or less equals – disputes that have no immediate bearing on the rights or obligations of others – can seldom be a matter of public interest.” These words also capture this dispute.
[68] There is little here partaking of classic SLAPP indicia – no power imbalance, no history of Benchwood using litigation to silence critics, although there is some doubt about whether the damages claimed are more than merely nominal.
[69] Then there is the presence of malice. The motion judge addressed this question squarely:
The plaintiffs have alleged malice on the part of the defendants in making the impugned statements. A general plea of malice without further particulars is not sufficient. In my view, I am satisfied that the dominant motive for the defendants to post the comments they did was as a warning to other consumers after they saw photos of their home posted on the plaintiffs’ [Benchwood’s] social media.
[70] With respect, this analysis falls into the problems with s. 137.1(4)(a)(ii) in the context of a defamation action that I raised earlier at paras. 53 to 56. The interest in protecting the expression is reduced by personal attacks and defamatory statements. Statements that are exaggerated, inaccurate or contain deliberate misrepresentations also reduce the public interest in protecting them. Perhaps the Homeowners’ dominant motive was to warn other consumers. But that was not their only motive. Consider these statements: Ms. Prescott posted that Mr. Slaven and his subcontractors were “in on this dishonest operation together” and “operate in a dishonest manner;” Mr. Green referred to Mr. Slaven as “a miserable con artist” and a “dirtbag”, and accused him of threatening women and making false assault charges against women. The statements themselves appear to be particulars of malice. The accusations go well beyond a complaint about Benchwood walking off the job and doing some of its work poorly.
[71] This is a case in which the straight logic of a private dispute should apply. Section 137.1 does not apply. There is no reason to stop the Benchwood defamation action from proceeding. The tension between reputation and free speech that is endemic to anti-SLAPP motions resolves by giving priority to reputation in this case.
(4) Did the motion judge err in her costs award? [72] This issue is no longer live.
D. Disposition [73] For the reasons set out above, I would allow the appeal, with costs.
[74] The successful moving party on an anti-SLAPP motion to dismiss is entitled to costs on the motion and in the proceeding on a full indemnity basis under s. 137.1(7). The motion judge awarded the Homeowners $75,000 inclusive of costs and disbursements. Because the appeal is being allowed, s.137.1(8) comes into play. It provides:
(8) If a judge does not dismiss a proceeding under this section, the responding party is not entitled to costs on the motion, unless the judge determines that such an award is appropriate in the circumstances.
[75] I would award Benchwood costs on the appeal in the amount of $14,000, all-inclusive, as agreed. With respect to costs for the motion, I would invite the parties to make written submissions of no more than 5 pages in length. Benchwood’s submissions shall be submitted within one week from the date of these reasons and the Homeowners shall submit by March 13. Benchwood may submit a reply of no more than 2 pages in length by March 20.
Released: March 6, 2025 “P.D.L.”
“P. Lauwers J.A.”
“I agree. David Brown J.A.”
“I agree. Coroza J.A.”
APPENDIX
Dismissal of proceeding that limits debate
Purposes
137.1 (1) The purposes of this section and sections 137.2 to 137.5 are,
(a) to encourage individuals to express themselves on matters of public interest;
(b) to promote broad participation in debates on matters of public interest;
(c) to discourage the use of litigation as a means of unduly limiting expression on matters of public interest; and
(d) to reduce the risk that participation by the public in debates on matters of public interest will be hampered by fear of legal action. 2015, c. 23, s. 3.
Definition, “expression”
(2) In this section,
“expression” means any communication, regardless of whether it is made verbally or non-verbally, whether it is made publicly or privately, and whether or not it is directed at a person or entity. 2015, c. 23, s. 3.
Order to dismiss
(3) On motion by a person against whom a proceeding is brought, a judge shall, subject to subsection (4), dismiss the proceeding against the person if the person satisfies the judge that the proceeding arises from an expression made by the person that relates to a matter of public interest. 2015, c. 23, s. 3.
No dismissal
(4) A judge shall not dismiss a proceeding under subsection (3) if the responding party satisfies the judge that,
(a) there are grounds to believe that,
(i) the proceeding has substantial merit, and
(ii) the moving party has no valid defence in the proceeding; and
(b) the harm likely to be or have been suffered by the responding party as a result of the moving party’s expression is sufficiently serious that the public interest in permitting the proceeding to continue outweighs the public interest in protecting that expression. 2015, c. 23, s. 3.
No further steps in proceeding
(5) Once a motion under this section is made, no further steps may be taken in the proceeding by any party until the motion, including any appeal of the motion, has been finally disposed of. 2015, c. 23, s. 3.
No amendment to pleadings
(6) Unless a judge orders otherwise, the responding party shall not be permitted to amend his or her pleadings in the proceeding,
(a) in order to prevent or avoid an order under this section dismissing the proceeding; or
(b) if the proceeding is dismissed under this section, in order to continue the proceeding. 2015, c. 23, s. 3.
Costs on dismissal
(7) If a judge dismisses a proceeding under this section, the moving party is entitled to costs on the motion and in the proceeding on a full indemnity basis, unless the judge determines that such an award is not appropriate in the circumstances. 2015, c. 23, s. 3.
Costs if motion to dismiss denied
(8) If a judge does not dismiss a proceeding under this section, the responding party is not entitled to costs on the motion, unless the judge determines that such an award is appropriate in the circumstances. 2015, c. 23, s. 3.
Damages
(9) If, in dismissing a proceeding under this section, the judge finds that the responding party brought the proceeding in bad faith or for an improper purpose, the judge may award the moving party such damages as the judge considers appropriate.
[1] The motion judge dismissed the action by way of an endorsement on January 3, 2024, with reasons for decision released on January 16, 2024. The reasons are unreported.
[2] For brevity, I refer to the appellants collectively as “Benchwood” and to Ms. Prescott and Mr. Green as the “Homeowners” unless the context requires more specificity.
[3] R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43. For convenience, the text of s. 137.1 is reproduced in an Appendix.
[4] Park Lawn Corporation v. Kahu Capital Partners Ltd., 2023 ONCA 129, 165 O.R. (3d) 753, at para. 35, citing Tamming v. Paterson, [2021] O.J. No. 7126, 2021 ONSC 8306 (S.C.J.), per Myers J. at paras. 7–9, and Professor Hilary Young, “Canadian Anti-SLAPP Laws in Action” (2022), 100:2 Can. B. Rev. 186.
[5] Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Vavilov, 2019 SCC 65, [2019] 4 S.C.R. 653, at para. 118. The Vavilov court said, at para. 117, that “text, context and purpose” reflects the “modern approach” to interpretation, which requires “that the words of a statute must be read ‘in their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the object of the Act, and the intention of Parliament’”; 1704604 Ontario Ltd. v. Pointes Protection Association, 2020 SCC 22, [2020] 2 S.C.R. 587, at para. 6, citing Elmer A. Driedger, Construction of Statutes, 2nd ed. (Toronto: Butterworths, 1983), at p. 87, quoted in Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes Ltd. (Re), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 27, at para. 21. In my view, the “text, context and purpose” approach supplants the Driedger litany.
[6] Park Lawn, per Pepall J.A., at para. 33. And see Catalyst Capital Group Inc. v. West Face Capital Inc., 2023 ONCA 381, per Miller J.A., at para. 17, leave to appeal refused, [2023] S.C.C.A. Nos. 40876, 40867, and 40875.
[7] Halsbury’s Laws of Canada, “Defamation”, (Toronto: LexisNexis Canada, 2023 Reissue), at HDE-1; See also Allen M. Linden et al, Canadian Tort Law, 12th ed. (Toronto: LexisNexis Canada Inc., 2022), c. 14, on defamation.
[8] Irwin Toy Ltd. v. Québec (Attorney General), [1989] 1 S.C.R. 927, at p. 968.
[9] Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 1130, at para. 121.
[10] Church of Scientology, at para. 121.
[11] WIC Radio Ltd. v. Simpson, 2008 SCC 40 (CanLII), [2008] 2 SCR 420 at para. 2.
[12] WIC Radio, at para. 30.
[13] Boyer v. Callidus Capital Corp., 2023 ONCA 233, 480 D.L.R. (4th) 293, at para. 28.
[14] Pointes, at para. 58.
[15] See, for example, Mondal v. Evans-Bitten, 2023 ONCA 523, 485 D.L.R. (4th) 90 (“Mondal (ONCA)”), at para. 56; Marcellin v. London (City) Police Services Board, 2024 ONCA 468, at paras. 71, 77.
[16] Luc Crawford Design Inc. v. Mullowney, 2021 ONSC 7849, per Muszynski J., at para. 26.
[17] See Bradford Travel and Cruises Ltd. v. Viveiros, 2019 ONSC 4587, at para. 31; 910938 Ontario Inc v. Moore, 2020 ONSC 4553, at paras. 19–22; Thorman et al. v. McGraw, 2021 ONSC 7671, at paras. 41–42, rev’d 2022 ONCA 851; Canadian Thermo Windows Inc. v. Seangio, 2021 ONSC 6555, at para. 89; and New Dermamed Inc. v. Sulaiman, 2018 ONSC 2517, at para. 25.
[18] Sokoloff v. Tru-Path Occupational Therapy Services Ltd., 2020 ONCA 730, 153 O.R. (3d) 20, at para. 33; Hamilton v. Vaughan, 2025 ONCA 98, at para. 9; Dent-X Canada v. Houde, 2022 ONCA 414, at para. 11; and Echelon Environmental Inc. v. Glassdoor Inc., 2022 ONCA 391, at para. 8, leave to appeal requested but application for leave discontinued, [2022] S.C.C.A. No. 274.
[19] Mondal (ONCA), at paras. 40, 42–43.
[20] Mondal v. Evans-Bitten, 2022 ONSC 809, rev’d 2023 ONCA 523, 485 D.L.R. (4th) 90, at para. 40.
[21] 2009 SCC 61, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 640, at para. 105.
[22] Pointes, at para. 27.
[23] Pointes, at para. 101.
[24] Grist v. TruGrp Inc., 2021 ONCA 309, 156 O.R. (3d) 171, at para. 19, citing Sokoloff at para. 19.
[25] Echelon, at para. 8; Sokoloff, at para. 33; Hamilton, at para. 9; Dent-X Canada, at paras. 11–14.
[26] Canadian Union of Postal Workers v. B’nai Brith Canada, 2021 ONCA 529, 460 D.L.R. (4th) 245, at para. 12; Thatcher-Craig v. Clearview (Township), 2023 ONCA 96, 480 D.L.R. (4th) 639, at paras. 44-45; Levant v. DeMelle, 2022 ONCA 79, 79 C.P.C. (8th) 437, at para. 60, leave to appeal refused, [2022] S.C.C.A. No. 88; Hamer v. Jane Doe, 2024 ONCA 721, at para. 40; and Williams v. VAC Developments Limited, 2024 ONCA 713, at para. 14.
[27] See, for example, Mondal (ONCA), at para. 56; Marcellin, at paras. 71, 77.
[28] Pointes, at para. 18; Parklawn, at para. 28; Hamer, at para. 93; Burjoski v. Waterloo Region District School Board, 2024 ONCA 811, at para 47; Callidus, at para. 50; Thorman v. McGraw, 2022 ONCA 851, 476 D.L.R. (4th) 577 (Thorman, (ONCA)), at para. 9; 40 Days for Life v. Dietrich, 2024 ONCA 599, at para. 62, leave to appeal refused, [2024] S.C.C.A. No. 396; and Marcellin, at para. 11.
[29] Bent v. Platnick, 2020 SCC 23, [2020] 2 S.C.R. 645, at para. 103.
[30] Catalyst, at para. 38; Thorman (ONCA), at para. 4.
[31] Grist, at para. 17; Pointes, at para. 38; and Hamer, at para. 37.
[32] Li v. Barber, 2025 ONCA 169, at para. 62.
[33] Parklawn, at para. 28; Hamer, at para. 93; Burjoski, at para. 47; Callidus, at para. 50; Thorman (ONCA), at para. 9; 40 Days, at para. 62; and Marcellin, at para. 11.
[34] Marcellin, at para. 102; Hamer, at paras. 93, 96; Burjoski, at para. 47; Thorman (ONCA), at para. 15; and 40 Days, at para. 71.
[35] Hamer, at paras. 96–97; Burjoski, at para. 47.
[36] Marcellin, at para. 102.
[37] Hamer, at para. 97; Thorman, at para. 15; and Burjoski, at para. 47(i).
[38] See Burjoski, at para. 93.
[39] See 40 Days, at paras. 87–90.
[40] Buttar, at paras. 90–91.
[41] Callidus, at para. 53; Burjoski, at para. 47(i).
